WHEN Zarathustra was thirty years old, he left his home and the lake
of his home, and went into the mountains. There he enjoyed his spirit
and his solitude, and for ten years did not weary of it. But at last his
heart changed, and rising one morning with the rosy dawn, he went before
the sun, and spoke to it thus:
You great star! What would your happiness be, had you not those for
whom you shine?
For ten years have you climbed here to my cave: you would have wearied
of your light and of the journey, had it not been for me, my eagle,
and my serpent.
But we waited for you every morning, took from you your overflow,
and blessed you for it.
Behold. I am weary of my wisdom, like the bee that has gathered too
much honey; I need hands outstretched to take it.
I would rather give away and distribute, until the wise among men
once more find joy in their folly, and the poor in their riches.
Therefore must I descend into the deep: as you do in the evening, when
you go behind the sea, and give light also to the underworld, you exuberant
star!
Like you I have to go down, as men say, to whom I shall descend.
Bless me, then, you tranquil eye, that can look on even the greatest
happiness without envy!
Bless the cup that is about to overflow, that the water may flow golden
from it, and carry everywhere the reflection of your happiness!
Behold. This cup is again going to empty itself, and Zarathustra is going
to be a man again.
Thus began Zarathustra's down-going.
11
Prologue (2) 2
Zarathustra went down the mountain alone, no one meeting him.
When he entered the forest, however, there suddenly stood before him
an old man, who had left his holy hut to seek roots in the forest. And
thus spoke the old man to Zarathustra:
"No stranger to me is this wanderer: many years ago he passed by.
Zarathustra he was called, but he has changed.
Then you carried your ashes up to the mountains: will you now carry
your fire into the valleys? Do you not fear the arsonist's punishment?
Yes, I recognize Zarathustra. Pure are his eyes, and no loathing lurks
around his mouth. Does he not move like a dancer?
Transformed is Zarathustra; Zarathustra has become a child; an
awakened one is Zarathustra: what will you do in the land of the sleepers?
As in the sea have you lived in solitude, and it has supported you.
Alas, will you now go ashore? Alas, will you again haul your body by
yourself?"
Zarathustra answered: "I love mankind."
"Why," said the saint, "did I go into the forest and the desert? Was it
not because I loved men far too well?
Now I love God; men I do not love. Man is a thing too imperfect for
me. Love of man would be fatal to me."
Zarathustra answered: "Did I talk of love? I am bringing a gift to men."
"Give them nothing," said the saint. "Instead, take part of their load,
and carry it with them - that will be most agreeable to them: if only it is
agreeable to you!
If, however, you want to give something to them, give them no more
than alms, and let them also beg for it!"
"No," replied Zarathustra, "I give no alms. I am not poor enough for
that."
The saint laughed at Zarathustra, and spoke thus: "Then see to it that
they accept your treasures! They are distrustful of hermits, and do not
believe that we come with gifts.
Our footsteps sound too lonely through the streets. And at night, when
they are in bed and hear a man walking nearby long before sunrise, they
may ask themselves: Where is this thief going?
Do not go to men, but stay in the forest! Go rather to the animals! Why
not be like me - a bear among bears, a bird among birds?"
"And what does the saint do in the forest?" asked Zarathustra.
The saint answered: "I make songs and sing them; and in making songs
12
I laugh and weep and growl and hum: thus do I praise God.
With singing, weeping, laughing, growling and humming do I praise
the God who is my God. But what do you bring us as a gift?"
When Zarathustra had heard these words, he bowed to the saint and
said: "What should I have to give you?! Let me rather hurry away lest I
take something away from you!" - And thus they parted from one another,
the old man and Zarathustra, just like two laughing boys.
When Zarathustra was alone, however, he said to his heart: "Could it
be possible?! This old saint in the forest has not yet heard of it, that God
is dead!"
Prologue (3) 3
When Zarathustra arrived at the nearest town which is close to the
forest, he found many people assembled in the market-place, for it had
been announced that a tightrope walker would give a performance. And
Zarathustra spoke thus to the people:
I teach you the overman. Man is something to be surpassed. What have
you done to surpass him?
All beings thus far have created something beyond themselves: and
you want to be the ebb of this great tide, and even return to the beast
rather than surpass man?
What is the ape to man? A laughing-stock or a painful embarrassment.
And just the same shall man be to the overman: a laughing-stock or a
painful embarrassment.
You have made your way from worm to man, and much inside you is
still worm. Once you were apes, and still man is more of an ape than any
of the apes.
Even the wisest among you is only a conflict and mix of plant and
ghost. But do I bid you become ghosts or plants?
Behold, I teach you the overman!
The overman is the meaning of the earth. Let your will say: The overman
shall be the meaning of the earth!
I appeal to you, my brothers, remain true to the earth, and do not believe
those who speak to you of otherworldly hopes! Poisoners are they,
whether they know it or not.
Despisers of life are they, decaying and poisoned themselves, of whom
the earth is weary: so let them pass away!
13
Once sin against God was the greatest sin; but God died, and with him
these sinners. To sin against the earth is now the most terrible sin, and to
revere the entrails of the unknowable higher than the meaning of the
earth!
Once the soul looked contemptuously on the body, and that contempt
was supreme: the soul wished the body thin, hideous, and starved. Thus
it thought to escape from the body and the earth.
Oh, that soul was itself thin, hideous, and starved; and cruelty was the
desire of that soul!
But you, also, my brothers, tell me: What does your body say about
your soul? Is your soul not poverty and dirt and wretched contentment?
Truly, a dirty stream is man. One must be a sea, to receive a dirty
stream without becoming unclean.
Behold, I teach you the overman: he is this sea; in him your great contempt
can pass under and away.
What is your greatest experience? It is the hour of the great contempt.
The hour in which even your happiness becomes repulsive to you, and
even your reason and virtue.
The hour when you say: "What good is my happiness! It is poverty and
dirt and wretched contentment. But my happiness should justify existence
itself!"
The hour when you say: "What good is my reason! does it long for
knowledge as the lion for his food? It is poverty and dirt and wretched
contentment!"
The hour when you say: "What good are my virtues?! As yet they have
not made me rage with passion. How weary I am of my good and evil! It
is all poverty and dirt and wretched contentment!"
The hour when you say: "What good is my being just and right! I don't
see myself as fire and coals. The just and the right, however, are fire and
coals."
The hour when we say: "What good is my pity! Is not pity the cross on
which he is nailed who loves man? But my pity is not a crucifixion."
Have you ever spoken this way? Have you ever cried this way? Oh!
that I could hear you cry like this!
It is not your sin - it is your thrift that cries to heaven; it is the meanness
of your sin that cries to heaven.
Where is the lightning to lick you with its tongue? Where is the frenzy
with which you should be inoculated?
Behold, I teach you the overman: he is that lightning, he is that frenzy.
When Zarathustra had thus spoken, one of the people called out:
14
"We've heard enough of the tightrope walker; now let's see him also!"
And all the people laughed at Zarathustra. But the tightrope walker,
who thought the words were for him, began his performance.
Prologue (4) 4
Zarathustra, however, looked at the people and wondered. Then he
spoke thus:
Man is a rope stretched between animal and overman - a rope over an
abyss.
A dangerous crossing, a dangerous on-the-way, a dangerous lookingback,
a dangerous trembling and stopping.
What is great in man is that he is a bridge and not a goal: what can be
loved in man is that he is an over-going and a down-going.
I love those who know not how to live except as down-goers, for they
are the over-goers.
I love the great despisers, because they are the great reverers, and arrows
of longing for the other shore.
I love those who do not first seek a reason beyond the stars for going
down and being sacrifices, but sacrifice themselves to the earth, that the
earth of the overman may some day arrive.
I love him who lives in order to know, and seeks to know in order that
the overman may someday live. Thus he seeks his own down-going.
I love him who works and invents, that he may build a house for the
overman, and prepare for him earth, animal, and plant: for thus he seeks
his own down-going.
I love him who loves his virtue: for virtue is the will to down-going,
and an arrow of longing.
I love him who reserves no drop of spirit for himself, but wants to be
entirely the spirit of his virtue: thus he walks as spirit over the bridge.
I love him who makes his virtue his addiction and destiny: thus, for the
sake of his virtue, he is willing to live on, or live no more.
I love him who does not desire too many virtues. One virtue is more of
a virtue than two, because it is more of a knot for one's destiny to cling
to.
I love him whose soul squanders itself, who wants no thanks and gives
none back: for he always gives, and desires not to preserve himself.
15
I love him who is ashamed when the dice fall in his favor, and who
then asks: "Am I a dishonest player?" - for he is willing to perish.
I love him who scatters golden words in front of his deeds, and always
does more than he promises: for he seeks his own down-going.
I love him who justifies those people of the future, and redeems those
of the past: for he is willing to perish by those of the present.
I love him who chastens his God, because he loves his God: for he must
perish by the wrath of his God.
I love him whose soul is deep even in being wounded, and may perish
from a small experience: thus goes he gladly over the bridge.
I love him whose soul is so overfull that he forgets himself, and all
things are in him: thus all things become his down-going.
I love him who is of a free spirit and a free heart: thus is his head only
the entrails of his heart; his heart, however, drives him to go down.
I love all who are like heavy drops falling one by one out of the dark
cloud that hangs over man: they herald the coming of the lightning, and
perish as heralds.
Behold, I am a herald of the lightning, and a heavy drop out of the
cloud: the lightning, however, is called overman.
Prologue (5) 5
When Zarathustra had spoken these words, he again looked at the
people, and was silent. "There they stand," he said to his heart; "there
they laugh: they do not understand me; I am not the mouth for these
ears.
Must one first smash their ears, that they may learn to hear with their
eyes? Must one clatter like kettledrums and preachers of repentance? Or
do they only believe the stammerer?
They have something of which they are proud. What do they call it,
that which makes them proud? Education they call it; it distinguishes
them from the goatherds.
, Therefore, they dislike to hear the word 'contempt' applied to themselves.
So I will appeal to their pride.
I will speak to them of the most contemptible thing: that, however, is
the last man!"
And thus spoke Zarathustra to the people:
16
It is time for man to set a goal for himself. It is time for man to plant the
seed of his highest hope.
His soil is still rich enough for it. But that soil will one day be poor and
exhausted, and no lofty tree will any longer be able to grow on it.
Alas. There will come a time when man will no longer launch the arrow
of his longing beyond man - and the string of his bow will have unlearned
to whir!
I say to you: one must still have chaos in oneself to give birth to a dancing
star. I say to you: you still have chaos in yourself.
Alas. There will come a time when man can no longer give birth to any
star. Alas. There will come the time of the most despicable man, who can
no longer despise himself.
Behold. I show you the last man.
"What is love? What is creation? What is longing? What is a star?" - so
asks the last man and blinks.
The earth has then become small, and on it there hops the last man
who makes everything small. His race is as ineradicable as the flea; the
last man lives longest.
"We have invented happiness", say the last men, and they blink.
They have left the regions where it was hard to live; for one needs
warmth. One still loves one's neighbor and rubs against him; for one
needs warmth.
Becoming ill and being distrustful, they consider sinful: one proceeds
carefully. He is a fool who still stumbles over stones or men!
A little poison now and then: that makes pleasant dreams. And much
poison in the end, for a pleasant death.
One still works, for work is entertaining. But one is careful lest the entertainment
should assault you.
One no longer becomes poor or rich; both are too burdensome. Who
still wants to rule? Who still wants to obey? Both are too burdensome.
No shepherd and one herd! Everyone wants the same; everyone is the
same: he who feels differently goes voluntarily into the madhouse.
"Formerly all the world was insane", say the most refined, and they
blink.
They are clever and know all that has happened: so there is no end to
their mockery. People still quarrel, but they are soon reconciled - otherwise
it might spoil their digestion.
They have their little pleasures for the day, and their little pleasures for
the night, but they have a regard for health.
"We have invented happiness," say the last men, and they blink.
17
And here ended the first discourse of Zarathustra, which is also called
"The Prologue", for at this point the shouting and delight of the crowd
interrupted him. "Give us this last man, O Zarathustra" - they called out -
"Make us into these last men! Then will we make you a present of the
overman!" And all the people laughed and clucked with their tongues.
Zarathustra, however, grew sad, and said to his heart:
"They don't understand me: I am not the mouth for these ears.
Perhaps I have lived too long in the mountains; too long have I listened
to the brooks and trees: now I speak to them as to the goatherds.
Calm is my soul, and clear, like the mountains in the morning. But they
think I am cold, and a mocker with fearful jokes.
And now do they look at me and laugh: and while they laugh they hate
me too. There is ice in their laughter."
Prologue (6) 6
Then, however, something happened which made every mouth mute
and every eye fixed. For meanwhile the tight-rope walker had begun his
performance: he had come out from a little door, and was walking along
the rope which was stretched between two towers, so that it hung above
the market-place and the people. When he was exactly in the middle, the
little door opened once more, and a fellow, dressed like a clown or a buffoon,
jumped out and walked rapidly after the first one. "Go on, lamefoot,"
he cried in a frightful voice, "go on, lazybones, intruder, paleface,
or I shall tickle you with my heel! What are you doing here between the
towers? In the tower is where you belong. You should be locked up
there; you block the way for one better than yourself!" - And with every
word he came nearer and nearer. However when he was but a step behind,
a terrible thing happened which made every mouth silent and
every eye fixed - he uttered a yell like a devil, and jumped over the man
who was in his way. This man, when he thus saw his rival win, lost both
his head and his footing on the rope, threw away his pole, and he
plunged even faster downward into the depth, a whirlpool of arms and
legs. The market-place and the people were like the sea in a storm: they
rushed apart and over one another, especially where the body was to hit
the ground.
Zarathustra, however, remained standing, and just beside him fell the
18
body, badly injured and disfigured, but not yet dead. After a while consciousness
returned to the shattered man, and he saw Zarathustra kneeling
beside him. "What are you doing here?" said he at last, "I knew long
ago that the devil would trip me up. Now he drags me to hell. will you
prevent him?"
"On my honor, friend," answered Zarathustra, "there is nothing of this
that you speak: there is no devil and no hell. Your soul will be dead even
sooner than your body; therefore, fear nothing more!"
The man looked up distrustfully. "If you speak the truth," he said, "I
lose nothing when I lose my life. I am not much more than an animal
which has been taught to dance by blows and a few meager morsels."
"Not at all," said Zarathustra, "you have made danger your calling;
there is nothing contemptible in that. Now you perish by your calling:
therefore I will bury you with my own hands."
When Zarathustra had said this the dying one did not reply further;
but he moved his hand as if he sought the hand of Zarathustra in
gratitude.
Prologue (7) 7
Meanwhile the evening came on, and the market-place was veiled in
darkness. Then the people dispersed, for even curiosity and terror become
fatigued. However Zarathustra still sat beside the dead man on the
ground, absorbed in thought so that he forgot the time. At last it became
night, and a cold wind blew upon the lonely one. Then Zarathustra arose
and said to his heart:
Truly, a fine catch of fish has Zarathustra made to-day! It is not a man
he has caught, but a corpse.
Uncanny is human existence and as yet without meaning: a buffoon
can become a man's fate and fatality.
I want to teach men the meaning of their existence, which is the overman,
the lightning out of the dark cloud of man.
But I am still far from them, and my sense speaks not to their senses.
To men I am still something between a fool and a corpse.
Dark is the night, Dark are the ways of Zarathustra. Come, you cold
and stiff companion! I will carry you to the place where I may bury you
with my own hands.
19
Prologue (8) 8
When Zarathustra had said this to his heart, he put the corpse on his
shoulders and set out on his way. He had not gone a hundred steps,
when a man crept up to him and whispered in his ear - and behold it
was the buffoon from the tower. "Leave this town, O Zarathustra," he
said, "there are too many here who hate you. The good and just hate you,
and call you their enemy and despiser; the believers in the true faith hate
you, and call you a danger to the multitude. It was lucky for you that
you were laughed at; and truly you spoke like a buffoon. It was your
good fortune to associate with the dead dog; by so humiliating yourself
you have saved your life for today. But leave this town, - or tomorrow I
shall jump over you, a living man over a dead one." And when he had
said this, the buffoon vanished; But Zarathustra went on through the
dark streets.
At the gate of the town the gravediggers met him: they shone their
torch on his face, and, recognising Zarathustra, they greatly mocked him.
"Zarathustra is carrying away the dead dog: a fine thing that Zarathustra
has become a grave-digger! For our hands are too clean for this roast.
Will Zarathustra rob the devil of his mouthful? Well then, good luck
with your meal! If only the devil were not a better thief than Zarathustra!
- he will steal them both, he will eat them both!" And they laughed and
put their heads together.
Zarathustra said nothing but went on his way. When he had gone on
for two hours, past forests and swamps, he heard too much of the
hungry howling of the wolves, and he himself became hungry. So he
stopped at a lonely house in which a light was burning.
"Hunger attacks me," said Zarathustra, "like a robber. Among forests
and swamps my hunger attacks me, and late in the night.
"My hunger has strange moods. Often it comes to me only after a meal,
and today it did not come at all; where has it been?"
And with that, Zarathustra knocked at the door of the house. An old
man appeared, who carried a light, and asked: "Who comes to me and
my bad sleep?"
"A living man and a dead one," said Zarathustra. "Give me something
to eat and drink, I forgot about it during the day. He that feeds the
20
hungry refreshes his own soul, thus speaks wisdom."
The old man went back in, but returned shortly and offered Zarathustra
bread and wine. "A bad country for the hungry," he said; "that is why
I live here. Animals and men come to me, the hermit. But bid your companion
eat and drink also, he is wearier than you are." Zarathustra
replied: "My companion is dead; I should hardly be able to persuade
him." "I don't care," said the old man peevishly; "Whoever knocks at my
door must take what I offer him. Eat and be off!"-
Thereafter Zarathustra again went on for two hours, trusting the path
and the light of the stars: for he was used to walking at night, and loved
to look into the face of all that sleeps. When morning dawned, however,
Zarathustra found himself in a thick forest, and he did not see a path
anywhere. So he put the dead man in a hollow tree - for he wanted to
protect him from the wolves - and he himself lay down on the ground
and moss, his head beneath the tree. And soon he fell asleep, tired in
body but with a tranquil soul.
Prologue (9) 9
Zarathustra slept a long time and not only the rosy dawn passed over
his face, but also the morning. At last, however, his eyes opened:
amazed, he gazed into the forest and the stillness; amazed, he gazed into
himself. Then he arose quickly, like a seafarer who all at once sees the
land, and he rejoiced, for he saw a new truth. And he spoke thus to his
heart:
A light has dawned upon me: I need companions - living ones, not
dead companions and corpses, which I carry with me wherever I wish.
But I need living companions, who will follow me because they want
to follow themselves - wherever I want. A light has dawned upon me.
Not to the people is Zarathustra to speak, but to companions! Zarathustra
shall not become a shephard and a sheepdog to the herd!
To lure many from the herd - for that I have come. The people and the
herd shall be angry with me: Zarathustra wants to be called a robber by
the herdsmen.
I say herdsmen, but they call themselves the good and just. I say herdsmen,
but they call themselves the believers in the true faith.
Behold the good and just! Whom do they hate most? The one who
21
breaks their tables of values, the breaker, the lawbreaker; he, however, is
the creator.
Behold the believers of all beliefs! Whom do they hate most? The one
who breaks up their tables of values, the breaker, the lawbreaker; he,
however, is the creator.
Companions, the creator seeks, not corpses, not herds and believers.
Fellow creators the creator seeks - those who write new values on new
tables.
Companions, the creator seeks, and fellow harvesters; for with
everything is ripe for the harvest. But he lacks the hundred sickles: so he
plucks the ears of corn and is annoyed.
Companions, the creator seeks, and such as know how to whet their
sickles. They will they be called destroyers, and despisers of good and
evil. But they are the harvesters and rejoicers.
Fellow-creators, Zarathustra seeks; fellow harvesters and fellow rejoicers,
Zarathustra seeks: what has he to do with herds and shepherds
and corpses!
And you, my first companion, farewell! I have buried you well in your
hollow tree; I have hidden you from the wolves.
But I part from you; the time has arrived. Between rosy dawn and rosy
dawn there came to me a new truth.
I am not to be a shepherd, I am not to be a gravedigger. No more will I
speak to the people; for the last time have I spoken to the dead.
I will join the creators, the harvesters, and the rejoicers: I will show
them the rainbow and all the steps to the overman.
I will sing my song to the hermits; to the lonesome and the twosome I
will sing my song; and to whoever still has ears for the unheard, I will
make his heart heavy with my happiness.
I go towards my goal, I follow my course; over those who hesitate and
lag behind I will leap. Thus may my going be their down going-down!
Prologue (10) 10
Zarathustra said this to his heart when the sun stood high at noon.
Then he looked inquiringly up high, for he heard above him the sharp
call of a bird. And Behold! An eagle swept through the air in wide
circles, and on it hung a serpent, not like a prey, but like a friend: for it
22
kept itself coiled round the eagle's neck.
"They are my animals," said Zarathustra, and rejoiced in his heart.
"The proudest animal under the sun and the wisest animal under the
sun, - they have come to search for me.
They want to know whether Zarathustra still lives. Truly, do I still live?
I have found it more dangerous among men than among animals; on
dangerous paths walks Zarathustra. May my animals lead me!
When Zarathustra had said this, he remembered the words of the saint
in the forest, sighed and spoke thus to his heart:
"I wish I were wiser! I wish I were wise from the very heart, like my
serpent!
But I am asking the impossible. So I ask my pride that it always go
along with my wisdom!
And if my wisdom should some day leave me - Ah, how it loves to fly
away! - then may my pride fly with my folly!"
Thus began Zarathustra's down-going.
23
First Part
THUS SPOKE ZARATHUSTRA
FIRST PART
1. The Three Metamorphoses
2. The Academic Chairs Of Virtue
3. On the Believers in an Afterworld
4. The Despisers Of The Body
5. Joys And Passions
6. The Pale Criminal
7. Reading And Writing
8. The Tree On The Hill
9. The Preachers Of Death
10. War And Warriors
11. The New Idol
12. The Flies In The Market-Place
13. Chastity
14. The Friend
15. The Thousand And One Goals
16. Neighbour-Love
17. The Way Of The Creating One
18. Old And Young Women
19. The Bite Of The Adder
20. Child And Marriage
21. Voluntary Death
22. The Bestowing Virtue
Part 1, (1) THE THREE METAMORPHOSES
Three metamorphoses of the spirit do I name to you: how the spirit becomes
a camel, the camel a lion, and the lion at last a child.
Many heavy things are there for the spirit, the strong weight-bearing
spirit in which reverence dwells: for the heavy and the heaviest are what
its strength longs for.
24
What is heavy? so asks the weight-bearing spirit; then it kneels down
like the camel, and wants to be well loaded.
What is the heaviest thing, you heroes? asks the weight-bearing spirit,
that I may take it upon me and rejoice in my strength.
Is it not this: To humble oneself in order to hurt one's pride? To let
one's folly shine in order to mock one's wisdom?
Or is it this: To desert our cause when it celebrates its triumph? To
climb high mountains to tempt the tempter?
Or is it this: To feed on the acorns and grass of knowledge, and for the
sake of truth to suffer hunger of soul?
Or is it this: To be sick and send away comforters, and make friends
with the deaf, who never hear what you wish?
Or is it this: To wade into dirty water when it is the water of truth, and
not repelling cold frogs and hot toads?
Or is it this: To love those who despise us, and give one's hand to the
phantom when it is going to frighten us?
All these heaviest things the weight-bearing spirit takes upon itself:
and like the camel, which, when burdened, speeds into the wilderness,
so the spirit speeds into its wilderness.
But in the loneliest wilderness the second metamorphosis happens:
here the spirit becomes a lion; it will seize freedom, and become master
in its own wilderness.
Here it seeks its last master: it will fight him, and its last God; for victory
it will struggle with the great dragon.
What is the great dragon which the spirit is no longer inclined to call
Lord and God? "You shall," is what great dragon is called. But the spirit
of the lion says, "I will."
"You shall," lies in its path, sparkling with gold - a beast covered with
scales; and on every scale glitters a golden, "You shall!"
The values of a thousand years glitter on those scales, and thus speaks
the mightiest of all dragons: "All the values of all things - glitter on me.
All values have already been created, and all created values - do I represent.
Truly, there shall be no 'I will' any more. Thus speaks the dragon.
My brothers, why is there need of the lion in the spirit? Why is it not
enough the beast of burden, which renounces and is reverent?
To create new values - that, even the lion cannot yet accomplish: but to
create itself freedom for new creating - that can the might of the lion do.
To create itself freedom, and give a holy No even to duty: for that, my
brothers, there is need of the lion.
To assume the right to new values - that is the most formidable
25
assumption for a weight-bearing and reverent spirit. Truly, to such a
spirit it is a theft, and the work of a beast of prey.
It once loved "You Shall" as its most sacred: now is it forced to find illusion
and arbitrariness even in the holiest things, that it may capture freedom
from its love: the lion is needed for this capture.
But tell me, my brothers, what the child can do, which even the lion
could not do? Why must the predatory lion still become a child?
Innocence is the child, and forgeting, a new beginning, a game, a selfpropelling
wheel, a first movement, a sacred Yes.
For the game of creating, my brothers, a sacred "yes" to life is needed:
the spirit now wills its own will; the one who had lost the world now attains
its own world.
Three metamorphoses of the spirit have I told you: how the spirit became
a camel, the camel a lion, and the lion at last a child. -
Thus spoke Zarathustra. And at that time he staying in the town which
is called The Motley Cow.
Part 1, (2) THE ACADEMIC CHAIRS OF VIRTUE
People recommended to Zarathustra a wise man, as one who could discourse
well about sleep and virtue: greatly was he honoured and rewarded
for it, and all the youths sat before his chair. To him went Zarathustra,
and sat among the youths before his chair. And thus spoke the wise
man:
Be respectful and bashful in presence of sleep! That is the first thing!
And avoid all who sleep badly and stay awake at night!
Even the thief is bashful in presence of sleep: he always steals softly
through the night. Shameless, however, is the night-watchman; shamelessly
he carries his horn.
No small art is it to sleep: it is necessary for that purpose to keep awake
all day.
Ten times a day must you overcome yourself: that causes wholesome
weariness, and is opium for the soul.
Ten times must you reconcile again with yourself; for overcoming is
bitterness, and the unreconciled ones sleep badly.
26
Ten truths must you find during the day; otherwise you will seek truth
during the night, and your soul will stay hungry.
Ten times must you laugh during the day, and be cheerful; otherwise
your stomach, the father of affliction and gloom, will disturb you in the
night.
Few people know it, but one must have all the virtues in order to sleep
well. Shall I bear false witness? Shall I commit adultery?
Shall I crave for my neighbour's maid? All that would bother a good
sleep.
And even if one has all the virtues, there is still one thing needful: to
send the virtues themselves to sleep at the right time. That they may not
quarrel with one another, the pretty little women! And not quarrel about
you, you unhappy man!
Peace with God and your neighbor: so desires good sleep. And peace
also with your neighbour's devil! Otherwise it will haunt you in the
night.
Honor to the authorities, and obedience, and also to the crooked authorities!
So desires good sleep. How can I help it, if power likes to walk
on crooked legs?
He who leads his sheep to the greenest pasture, shall always be for me
the best shepherd: that goes well with good sleep.
I do not desire many honors, nor great treasures: they excite the spleen.
But one sleeps badly without a good name and a little treasure.
The company of a few is more welcome to me than evil company: but
they must come and go at the right time. That goes well with good sleep.
Also, the poor in spirit greatly please me: they promote sleep. Blessed
are they, especially if one always tell them that they are right.
Thus passes the day of the virtuous. When night comes, then I take
good care not to summon sleep. It dislikes to be summoned - sleep, the
lord of the virtues!
Instead I think of what I have done and thought during the day. Ruminating,
patient as a cow, I ask myself: What were your ten overcomings?
And what were the ten reconciliations, and the ten truths, and the ten
laughters with which my heart enjoyed itself?
Thus pondering, while being cradled and rocked by forty thoughts, it
overtakes me all at once - sleep, the unsummoned, the lord of the virtues.
Sleep taps on my eye, and it turns heavy. Sleep touches my mouth, and
it remains open.
Truly, on soft soles does it come to me, the dearest of thieves, and
27
steals from me my thoughts: stupid do I then stand, like this academic
chair.
But not much longer do I stand: I am already lying down. -
When Zarathustra heard the wise man thus speak, he laughed in his
heart: for a light had dawned upon him. And thus spoke he to his heart:
This wise man seems to be a fool with his forty thoughts: but I believe
he knows well how to sleep.
Happy even is he who lives near this wise man! Such sleep is contagious
- even through a thick wall it is contagious.
There is even magic in his professorial chair. And not in vain did the
youths sit before the preacher of virtue.
His wisdom is to keep awake in order to sleep well. And truly, if life
had no sense, and I had to choose nonsense, this would be the most desirable
nonsense for me also.
Now I know well what people sought formerly above all else when
they sought teachers of virtue. Good sleep they sought for themselves,
and opiate virtues to promote it!
To all those much praised sages of the academic chairs, wisdom was
sleep without dreams: they knew no higher significance of life.
Even at present, to be sure, there are some like this preacher of virtue,
and not always so honorable: but their time is past. And not much longer
do they stand: already they are lying down.
Blessed are those sleepy men: for they soon shall drop off. -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 1, (3) ON BELIEVERS IN AN AFTERWORLD
Once on a time, Zarathustra also cast his fancy beyond man, like all believers
in an afterworld. The work of a suffering and tortured God, the
world then seemed to me.
The dream and fiction of a god, the world then seemed to me; colored
smoke before the eyes of a discontented god.
Good and evil, and joy and pain, and I and you - colored smoke did
they seem to me before creative eyes. The creator wished to look away
from himself; so he created the world.
Drunken joy it is for the sufferer to look away from his suffering and
28
forget himself. Drunken joy and self-forgetting, did the world once seem
to me.
This world, eternally imperfect, image of an eternal contradiction and
imperfect image - a drunken joy to its imperfect creator: thus did the
world once seem to me.
Thus did I also once cast my delusion beyond man, like all the believers
in an afterworld. Beyond man, indeed?
Ah, you brothers, that god whom I created was man-made and madness,
like all gods!
Human was he, and only a poor fragment of a human and ego. Out of
my own ashes and glow it came to me, that phantom. And truly, it came
not to me from the beyond!
What happened, my brothers? I surpassed myself, the suffering one; I
carried my own ashes to the mountain; a brighter flame I contrived for
myself. And Behold, then the phantom withdrew from me!
To me, the convalescent, it would now be suffering and torment to believe
in such phantoms: suffering it would now be to me, and humiliation.
Thus speak I to believers in an afterworld.
Suffering it was, and impotence - that created all afterworlds; and the
brief madness of bliss, which is experienced only by those who suffer
most deeply.
Weariness, which seeks to get to the ultimate with one leap, with a
death-leap; a poor ignorant weariness, unwilling even to will any longer:
that created all gods and afterworlds.
Believe me, my brothers! It was the body which despaired of the body -
it groped with the fingers of the deluded spirit at the ultimate walls.
Believe me, my brothers! It was the body which despaired of the earth -
it heard the belly of existence speaking to it.
It sought to get through these ultimate walls with its head - and not
only with its head - into "the other world."
But that "other world" is well concealed from man, that dehumanized,
inhuman world, which is a celestial nothingness; and the belly of existence
does not speak to humans at all, except as a human.
Truly, all being is difficult to demonstrate and prove, and hard to make
it speak. Tell me, you brothers, is not the strangest of all things best
demonstrated?
Yes, this I, with its contradiction and confusion, speaks most honestly
of its being - this creating, willing, valuing ego, which is the measure and
value of things.
And this most honest existence, the I - it speaks of the body, and still
29
wants the body, even when it poetizes and raves and flutters with
broken wings.
Always more honestly learns it to speak, this I; and the more it learns,
the more does it find titles and honors for the body and the earth.
A new pride my I taught me, and that I teach to men: no longer to
thrust one's head into the sand of heavenly things, but to carry it freely, a
terrestrial head, which creates a meaning for the earth!
A new will I teach to men: to choose that path which man has followed
blindly, and to approve of it - and no longer to slink aside from it, like
the sick and dying!
The sick and dying - it was they who despised the body and the earth,
and invented the heavenly world, and the redeeming drops of blood; but
even those sweet and dismal poisons they borrowed from the body and
the earth!
From their misery they sought escape, and the stars were too far for
them. Then they sighed: "Would that there were heavenly paths by
which to sneak into another existence and into happiness!" Then they
contrived for themselves their secret ways and bloody potions!
Beyond the sphere of their body and this earth they now fancied themselves
transported, these ungrateful ones. But to what did they owe the
convulsion and rapture of their transport? To their bodies and this earth.
Gentle is Zarathustra to the sickly. Truly, he is not angry at their ways
of consolation and ingratitude. May they become convalescents and
overcomers, and create higher bodies for themselves!
Neither is Zarathustra angry at a convalescent who looks tenderly on
his delusions, and at midnight sneaks round the grave of his God; but
even his tears indicate to me sickness and a sick body.
Many sickly ones have there always been among those who invent
fables and long for God; violently they hate the discerning ones, and that
youngest of virtues, which is called "honesty".
They always gaze backward toward dark ages: then, indeed, were delusion
and faith something different: the delirium of reason was likeness
to God, and doubt was sin.
Too well do I know those godlike men: they insist on being believed in,
and that doubt is sin. Too well, also, do I know what they themselves
most believe in.
Truly, not in afterworlds and redemptive drops of blood, but in the
body do they also believe most; and their own body is for them the
thing-in-itself.
But it is a sickly thing to them, and gladly would they get out of their
30
skin. Therefore they listen to the preachers of death, and themselves
preach afterworlds.
Listen rather, my brothers, to the voice of the healthy body; it is a more
honest and pure voice.
More honestly and purely speaks the healthy body, perfect and
squared-off: it speaks of the meaning of the earth.
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 1, (4) THE DESPISERS OF THE BODY
To the despisers of the body I want to speak. I would not have them
learn and teach differently, but merely say farewell to their own bodies -
and thus become silent.
"Body am I, and soul" - so says the child. And why should one not
speak like children?
But the awakened and the knowing say: "Body am I entirely, and nothing
more; and soul is only a word for something about the body."
The body is a great intelligence, a multiplicity with one sense, a war
and a peace, a herd and a shepherd.
An instrument of your body is also your little intelligence, my brother,
which you call "spirit" - a little instrument and toy of your great intelligence.
"I," you say, and are proud of that word. But greater is that in which
you do not wish to believe - your body with its great intelligence; it does
not says "I," but does "I."
What the sense feels, what the spirit knows, never has its end in itself.
But sense and spirit would persuade you that they are the end of all
things: that is how vain they are.
Instruments and toys are sense and spirit: behind them there is still the
self. The self also seeks with the eyes of the senses, it also listens with the
ears of the spirit.
Always the self listens and seeks; it compares, overpowers, conquers,
and destroys. It rules, and is also the ruler of the "I".
Behind your thoughts and feelings, my brother, stands a mighty ruler,
an unknown sage - it is called the subconscious self; it dwells in your
31
body, it is your body.
There is more reason, sanity and intelligence in your body than in your
best wisdom. And who knows why your body requires precisely your
best wisdom?
Your subconscious self laughs at your "I", and its bold leaps. "What are
these leaps and flights of thought to me?" it says to itself. "A detour to
my purpose. I am the leading-string of the ego, and the prompter of its
thoughts."
The subconscious self says to the "I": "Feel pain here!" Then the "I" suffers,
and thinks how it might end its suffering - and that is why it is
made to think.
The subconscious self says to the "I": "Feel desire or pleasure or joy
here!" Then the "I" is happy, and thinks how it might often be happy
again - and that is why it is made to think.
I want to speak to the despisers of the body. It is their respect and esteem
that produces their despising. What is it that created respecting and
esteeming and despising and worth and will?
The creative subconscious self created for itself respecting and esteeming
and despising, it created for itself joy and sorrow and pain. The creative
body created spirit as a hand of its will.
Even in your folly and despising you each serve your self, you despisers
of the body. I tell you, your very self wants to die, and turns away
from life.
No longer can your subconscious self do that which it desires most: to
create beyond itself. That is what it desires most; that is all its fervour.
But it is now too late to do so: so your self wishes to go under, you despisers
of the body.
Your subconscious self wants to go under, to perish; and that is why
you have you become despisers of the body. For you are no longer able
to create beyond yourselves.
And therefore are you now angry with life and with the earth. An unconscious
envy speaks out of the squinting glance of your contempt.
I will not follow you, you despisers of the body! For me you are not a
bridge to the overman! -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
32
Part 1, (5) JOYS AND PASSIONS
My brother, when you have a virtue, and it is your own virtue, you
have it in common with no one.
To be sure, you would call it by name and caress it; you would pull its
ears and amuse yourself with it.
And behold, you have its name in common with the people, and have
become one of the people and the herd with your virtue!
It is better for you to say: "Inexpressible is it, and nameless, that which
is agony and sweetness to my soul, and also the hunger of my belly."
Let your virtue be too high for the familiarity of names, and if you
must speak of it, be not ashamed to stammer about it.
Then speak and stammer: "This is my good, this do I love, it pleases me
entirely, only this way do I want the good.
Not as the law of a God do I desire it, not as a human law or a human
need do I want it; it shall not be a signpost for me to over-earths and
paradises.
An earthly virtue is what I love: it has little prudence, and least of all
the reason and wisdom of everyone.
But that bird built its nest beside me: therefore, I love and cherish it -
now it sits beside me on its golden eggs."
Thus should you stammer, and praise your virtue.
Once you had passions and called them evil. But now you have only
your virtues: they grew out of your passions.
You set your highest goal in the heart of those passions: then they became
your virtues and joys.
And though you were of the race of the hot-tempered, or of the lustful,
or of the fanatical, or the vengeful;
in the end, all your passions became virtues, and all your devils, angels.
Once you had wild dogs in your cellar: but they changed at last into
birds and charming singers.
Out of your poisons you brewed soothing ointments for yourself; you
milked your cow of sorrow - now you drink the sweet milk of her udder.
And nothing evil grows out of you any longer, unless it be the evil that
grows out of the conflict of your virtues.
My brother, if you are fortunate, then you will have one virtue and no
more: thus you go more easily over the bridge.
To have many virtues is a distinction, but it is a hard fate; and many a
one has gone into the desert and killed himself, because he was weary of
33
being the battle and battlefield of virtues.
My brother, are war and battle evil? Necessary, however, is this evil;
necessary are envy and distrust and slander among the virtues.
Behold how each of your virtues wants the highest place; each wants
your whole spirit to be its herald, each wants your whole power, in
wrath, hatred, and love.
Each virtue is jealous of every other, and jealousy is a dreadful thing.
Even virtues can perish of jealousy.
He whom the flames of jealousy surround, at last, like the scorpion,
turns the poisoned sting against himself.
Ah! my brother, have you never seen a virtue slander and stab itself?
Man is something that must be overcome: and therefore shall you love
your virtues, - for you will perish by them.-
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 1, (6) THE PALE CRIMINAL
You do not mean to slay, you judges and sacrificers, until the animal
has bowed its head? Behold. the pale criminal has bowed his head: out of
his eye speaks the great contempt.
"My ego is something which is to be overcome: my ego is to me the
great contempt of man": that is what his eyes say.
When he judged himself - that was his supreme moment; let not the exalted
one relapse again into his baseness!
There is no salvation for him who thus suffers from himself, unless it
be speedy death.
Your slaying, you judges, shall be pity, and not revenge; and in that
you slay, see to it that you yourselves justify life!
It is not enough that you should reconcile with him whom you slay.
Let your sorrow be love to the overman: thus will you justify your own
survival!
"Enemy" shall you say but not "villain," "invalid" shall you say but not
"wretch," "fool" shall you say but not "sinner."
And you, red judge, if you would say audibly all you have done in
thought, then would everyone cry: "Away with the nastiness and the virulent
reptile!"
34
But one thing is the thought, another thing is the deed, and another
thing is the idea of the deed. The wheel of causality does not roll
between them.
An idea made this pale man pale. Adequate was he for his deed when
he did it, but the idea of it, he could not endure when it was done.
Evermore did he now see himself as the doer of one deed. Madness, I
call this: the exception reversed itself to the rule in him.
The streak of chalk bewitches the hen; the stroke he struck bewitched
his weak reason. Madness after the deed, I call this.
Listen, you judges! There is another madness besides, and it is before
the deed. Ah! you have not gone deep enough into this soul!
Thus speaks the red judge: "Why did this criminal commit murder? He
meant to rob." I tell you, however, that his soul wanted blood, not booty:
he thirsted for the happiness of the knife!
But his weak reason understood not this madness, and it persuaded
him. "What matter about blood!" it said; "wish you not, at least, to make
booty thereby? Or take revenge?"
And he listened to his weak reason: like lead lay its words upon him -
thereupon he robbed when he murdered. He did not mean to be
ashamed of his madness.
And now once more lies the lead of his guilt upon him, and once more
is his weak reason so benumbed, so paralyzed, and so dull.
Could he only shake his head, then would his burden roll off; but who
shakes that head?
What is this man? A mass of diseases that reach out into the world
through the spirit; there they want to get their prey.
What is this man? A coil of wild serpents that are seldom at peace
among themselves - so they go forth apart and seek prey in the world.
Look at that poor body! What it suffered and craved, the poor soul interpreted
to itself - it interpreted it as murderous desire, and eagerness
for the happiness of the knife.
Him who now turns sick, the evil overtakes which is now the evil: he
seeks to cause pain with that which causes him pain. But there have been
other ages, and another evil and good.
Once was doubt evil, and the will to Self. Then the invalid became a
heretic or sorcerer; as heretic or sorcerer he suffered, and sought to cause
suffering.
But this will not enter your ears; it hurts your good people, you tell me.
But what does it matter to me about your good people!
Many things in your good people cause me disgust, and truly, not their
35
evil. I would that they had a madness by which they succumbed, like
this pale criminal!
Truly, I would that their madness were called truth, or fidelity, or
justice: but they have their virtue in order to live long, and in wretched
self-complacency.
I am a railing alongside the torrent; whoever is able to grasp me may
grasp me! Your crutch, however, I am not. -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 1, (7) READING AND WRITING
Of all that is written, I love only what a person has written with his
blood. Write with blood, and you will find that blood is spirit.
It is no easy task to understand unfamiliar blood; I hate the reading
idlers.
He who knows the reader, does nothing more for the reader. Another
century of readers - and spirit itself will stink.
Every one being allowed to learn to read, ruins in the long run not only
writing but also thinking.
Once spirit was God, then it became man, and now it even becomes the
rabble.
He that writes in blood and aphorisms does not want to be read, but
learnt by heart.
In the mountains the shortest way is from peak to peak, but for that
route you must have long legs. Aphorisms should be peaks, and those
spoken to should be big and tall.
The atmosphere rare and pure, danger near and the spirit full of a joyful
wickedness: thus are things well matched.
I want to have goblins about me, for I am courageous. The courage
which scares away ghosts, creates for itself goblins - it wants to laugh.
I no longer feel in common with you; the very cloud which I see beneath
me, the blackness and heaviness at which I laugh - that is your
thunder-cloud.
You look aloft when you long for exaltation; and I look downward because
I am exalted.
Who among you can at the same time laugh and be exalted?
36
He who climbs on the highest mountains, laughs at all tragic plays and
tragic realities.
Courageous, unconcerned, scornful, coercive - so wisdom wishes us;
she is a woman, and ever loves only a warrior.
You tell me, "Life is hard to bear." But for what purpose should you
have your pride in the morning and your resignation in the evening?
Life is hard to bear: but do not affect to be so delicate! We are all of us
fine beasts of burden, male and female asses.
What have we in common with the rose-bud, which trembles because a
drop of dew has formed upon it?
It is true we love life; not because we are used to life, but because we
are used to loving.
There is always some madness in love. But there is always, also, some
method in madness.
And to me also, who appreciate life, the butterflies, and soap-bubbles,
and whatever is like them among us, seem most to enjoy happiness.
To see these light, foolish, pretty, lively little sprites flit about - that
moves Zarathustra to tears and songs.
I should only believe in a God that would know how to dance.
And when I saw my devil, I found him serious, thorough, profound,
solemn: he was the spirit of gravity - through him all things fall.
Not by wrath, but by laughter, do we slay. Come, let us slay the spirit
of gravity!
I learned to walk; since then have I let myself run. I learned to fly; since
then I do not need pushing in order to move from a spot.
Now am I light, now do I fly; now do I see myself under myself. Now
there dances a God in me.-
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 1, (8) THE TREE ON THE HILL
Zarathustra's eye had perceived that a certain youth avoided him. And
as he walked alone one evening over the hills surrounding the town
called "The Motley Cow," behold, there he found the youth sitting leaning
against a tree, and gazing with wearied look into the valley.
Zarathustra thereupon laid hold of the tree beside which the youth sat,
37
and spoke thus:
"If I wished to shake this tree with my hands, I should not be able to do
so.
But the wind, which we see not, troubles and bends it as it tilts. We are
sorest bent and troubled by invisible hands."
Thereupon the youth arose disconcerted, and said: "I hear Zarathustra,
and just now was I thinking of him!" Zarathustra answered:
"Why are you frightened on that account? - But it is the same with man
as with the tree.
The more he seeks to rise into the height and light, the more vigorously
do his roots struggle earthward, downward, into the dark and deep - into
the evil."
"Yes, into the evil!" cried the youth. "How is it possible that you have
discovered my soul?"
Zarathustra smiled, and said: "Many a soul one will never discover, unless
one first invent it."
"Yes, into the evil!" cried the youth once more.
"you said the truth, Zarathustra. I trust myself no longer since I sought
to rise into the height, and nobody trusts me any longer; how does that
happen?
I change too quickly: my to-day refutes my yesterday. I often overleap
the steps when I clamber; for so doing, none of the steps pardons me.
When aloft, I find myself always alone. No one speaks to me; the frost
of solitude makes me tremble. What do I seek on the height?
My contempt and my longing increase together; the higher I clamber,
the more do I despise him who clambers. What does he seek on the
height?
How ashamed I am of my clambering and stumbling! How I mock at
my violent panting! How I hate him who flies! How tired I am on the
height!"
Here the youth was silent. And Zarathustra contemplated the tree beside
which they stood, and spoke thus:
"This tree stands lonely here on the hills; it has grown up high above
man and beast.
And if it wanted to speak, it would have none who could understand
it: so high has it grown.
Now it waits and waits, - for what does it wait? It dwells too close to
the seat of the clouds; it waits perhaps for the first lightning?"
When Zarathustra had said this, the youth called out with violent gestures:
"Yes, Zarathustra, you speak the truth. My destruction I longed
38
for, when I desired to be on the height, and you are the lightning for
which I waited! Behold. what have I been since you have appeared
among us? It is my envy of you that has destroyed me!" - Thus spoke the
youth, and wept bitterly. Zarathustra, however, put his arm about him,
and led the youth away with him.
And when they had walked a while together, Zarathustra began to
speak thus:
It rends my heart. Better than your words express it, your eyes tell me
all your danger.
As yet you are not free; you still seek freedom. Too unslept has your
seeking made you, and too wakeful.
On the open height would you be; for the stars thirsts your soul. But
your bad impulses also thirst for freedom.
Your wild dogs want liberty; they bark for joy in their cellar when your
spirit endeavor to open all prison doors.
Still are you a prisoner - it seems to me - who devises liberty for himself:
ah! sharp becomes the soul of such prisoners, but also deceitful and
wicked.
It is still necessary for the liberated spirit to purify himself. Much of the
prison and the mould still remains in him: pure has his eye still to become.
Yes, I know your danger. But by my love and hope I appeal to you: cast
not your love and hope away!
Noble you feel yourself still, and noble others also feel you still, though
they bear you a grudge and cast evil looks. Know this, that to everybody
a noble one stands in the way.
Also to the good, a noble one stands in the way: and even when they
call him a good man, they want thereby to put him aside.
The new, would the noble man create, and a new virtue. The old,
wants the good man, and that the old should be conserved.
But it is not the danger of the noble man to turn a good man, but lest he
should become an arrogant boor , a mocker, or a destroyer.
Ah! I have known noble ones who lost their highest hope. And then
they slandered all high hopes.
Then lived they shamelessly in temporary pleasures, and beyond the
day had hardly an aim.
"Spirit is also voluptuousness," - said they. Then broke the wings of
their spirit; and now it creeps about, and defiles where it gnaws.
Once they thought of becoming heroes; but sensualists are they now. A
trouble and a terror is the hero to them.
39
But by my love and hope I appeal to you: cast not away the hero in
your soul! Maintain holy your highest hope! -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 1, (9) THE PREACHERS OF DEATH
There are preachers of death: and the earth is full of those to whom renunciation
life must be preached.
Full is the earth of the superfluous; marred is life by the many-toomany.
May they be lured out of this life by the "life eternal"!
"The yellow ones": so are called the preachers of death, or "the black
ones." But I will show them to you in other colors besides.
There are the terrible ones who carry about in themselves the beast of
prey, and have no choice except lusts or self-laceration. And even their
lusts are self-laceration.
They have not yet become men, those terrible ones: may they preach
desistance from life, and pass away themselves!
There are the spiritually decaying ones: hardly are they born when
they begin to die, and long for doctrines of weariness and renunciation.
They would rather be dead, and we should approve of their wish! Let
us beware of awakening those dead ones, and of damaging those living
coffins!
They meet an invalid, or an old man, or a corpse - and immediately
they say: "Life is refuted!"
But they only are refuted, and their eye, which sees only one aspect of
existence.
Shrouded in thick melancholy, and eager for the little casualties that
bring death: thus do they wait, and clench their teeth.
Or else, they grasp at candy, and mock at their childishness thereby:
they cling to their straw of life, and mock at their still clinging to it.
Their wisdom speaks thus: "A fool, he who remains alive; but so far are
we fools! And that is the most foolish thing in life!"
"Life is only suffering": so say others, and lie not. Then see to it that you
cease! See to it that the life ceases which is only suffering!
And let this be the teaching of your virtue: "you shall slay yourself! you
shall steal away from yourself!" -
40
"Lust is sin," - so say some who preach death - "let us go apart and beget
no children!"
"Giving birth is troublesome," - say others - "why still give birth? One
bears only the unfortunate!" And they also are preachers of death.
"Pity is necessary," - so says a third party. "Take what I have! Take
what I am! So much less does life bind me!"
Were they consistently pitiful, then would they make their neighbor
sick of life. To be wicked - that would be their true goodness.
But they want to be rid of life; what care they if they bind others still
faster with their chains and gifts!-
And you also, to whom life is rough labor and disquiet, are you not
very tired of life? Are you not very ripe for the sermon of death?
All you to whom rough labor is dear, and the rapid, new, and strange -
you put up with yourselves badly; your diligence is flight, and the will to
self-forgetfulness.
If you believed more in life, then would you devote yourselves less to
the momentary. But for waiting, you have not enough of capacity in you
- nor even for idling!
Everywhere resounds the voices of those who preach death; and the
earth is full of those to whom death has to be preached.
Or "life eternal"; it is all the same to me - if only they pass away
quickly! -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 1, (10) WAR AND WARRIORS
By our best enemies we do not want to be spared, nor by those either
whom we love from the very heart. So let me tell you the truth!
My brothers in war! I love you from the very heart. I am, and was ever,
your counterpart. And I am also your best enemy. So let me tell you the
truth!
I know the hatred and envy of your hearts. you are not great enough
not to know of hatred and envy. Then be great enough not to be
ashamed of them!
And if you cannot be saints of knowledge, then, I pray you, be at least
its warriors. They are the companions and forerunners of such
41
sainthood.
I see many soldiers; could I but see many warriors! "Uniform" one calls
what they wear; may that which it hides not be uniform!
You shall be those whose eyes ever seek for an enemy - for your enemy.
And with some of you there is hatred at first sight.
Your enemy shall you seek; your war shall you wage, and for the sake
of your thoughts! And if your thoughts succumb, your uprightness shall
still shout triumph thereby!
You shall love peace as a means to new wars - and the short peace
more than the long.
You I advise not to work, but to fight. You I advise not to peace, but to
victory. Let your work be a fight, let your peace be a victory!
One can only be silent and sit peacefully when one has bow and arrow;
otherwise one chatters and quarrels. Let your peace be a victory!
You say it is the good cause which sanctifies even war? I say to you: it
is the good war which hallows every cause.
War and courage have done more great things than charity. Not your
sympathy, but your bravery has thus far saved the victims.
"What is good?" you ask. To be brave is good. Let the little girls say:
"To be good is what is pretty, and at the same time touching."
They call you heartless: but your heart is true, and I love the bashfulness
of your goodwill. you are ashamed of your flow, and others are
ashamed of their ebb.
You are ugly? Well then, my brothers, take the sublime about you, the
mantle of the ugly!
And when your soul becomes great, then does it become high-spirited,
and in your sublimeness there is wickedness. I know you.
In wickedness the high-spirited man and the weakling meet. But they
misunderstand one another. I know you.
You shall only have enemies to be hated, but not enemies to be despised.
you must be proud of your enemies; then, the successes of your
enemies are also your successes.
Resistance - that is the distinction of the slave. Let your distinction be
obedience. Let your commanding itself be obeying!
To the good warrior sounds "you shall" more pleasant than "I will."
And all that is dear to you, you shall first have it commanded to you.
Let your love to life be love to your highest hope; and let your highest
hope be the highest thought of life!
Your highest thought, however, you shall have it commanded to you
by me - and it is this: man is something that is to be surpassed.
42
So live your life of obedience and of war! What matter about long life!
What warrior wishes to be spared!
I spare you not, I love you from my very heart, my brothers in war! -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 1, (11) THE NEW IDOL
Somewhere there are still peoples and herds, but not with us, my
brothers: here there are states.
A state? What is that? Well! open now your ears to me, for now will I
say to you my word concerning the death of peoples.
State is the name of the coldest of all cold monsters. Coldly lies it also;
and this lie creeps from its mouth: "I, the state, am the people."
It is a lie! Creators were they who created peoples, and hung a faith
and a love over them: thus they served life.
Destroyers, are they who lay traps for many, and call it the state: they
hang a sword and a hundred cravings over them.
Where there is still a people, there the state is not understood, but
hated as the evil eye, and as sin against laws and customs.
This sign I give to you: every people speaks its language of good and
evil: this its neighbor understands not. Its language has it devised for itself
in laws and customs.
But the state lies in all languages of good and evil; and whatever it says
it lies; and whatever it has it has stolen.
False is everything in it; with stolen teeth it bites, the biting one. False
are even its bowels.
Confusion of language of good and evil; this sign I give to you as the
sign of the state. Truly, the will to death, indicates this sign! Truly, it
beckons to the preachers of death!
Many too many are born: for the superfluous ones was the state devised!
See just how it entices them to it, the many-too-many! How it swallows
and chews and rechews them!
"On earth there is nothing greater than I: it is I who am the regulating
finger of God." - thus roars the monster. And not only the long-eared and
short-sighted fall upon their knees!
43
Ah! even in your ears, you great souls, it whispers its gloomy lies! Ah!
it finds out the rich hearts which willingly lavish themselves!
Yes, it finds you out too, you conquerors of the old God! Weary you became
of the conflict, and now your weariness serves the new idol!
Heroes and honorable ones, it would rather set up around it, the new
idol! Gladly it basks in the sunshine of good consciences, - the cold monster!
Everything will it give you, if you worship it, the new idol: thus it purchases
the gleam of your virtue, and the glance of your proud eyes.
It seeks to allure by means of you, the many-too-many! Yes, a hellish
artifice has here been devised, a death-horse jingling with the trappings
of divine honors!
Yes, a dying for many has here been devised, which glorifies itself as
life: truly, a hearty service to all preachers of death!
The state, I call it, where all are poison-drinkers, the good and the bad:
the state, where all lose themselves, the good and the bad: the state,
where the slow suicide of all - is called "life."
Just see these superfluous ones! They steal the works of the inventors
and the treasures of the wise. Culture, they call their theft - and
everything becomes sickness and trouble to them!
Just see these superfluous ones! Sick are they always; they vomit their
bile and call it a newspaper. They devour one another, and cannot even
digest themselves.
Just see these superfluous ones! Wealth they acquire and become
poorer thereby. Power they seek for, and above all, the lever of power,
much money - these impotent ones!
See them clamber, these nimble apes! They clamber over one another,
and thus scuffle into the mud and the abyss.
Towards the throne they all strive: it is their madness - as if happiness
sat on the throne! Often sits filth on the throne. - and often also the
throne on filth.
Madmen they all seem to me, and clambering apes, and too eager.
Badly smells their idol to me, the cold monster: badly they all smell to
me, these idolaters.
My brothers, will you suffocate in the fumes of their snouts and appetites!
Better break the windows and jump into the open air!
Go away from the bad odor! Withdraw from the idolatry of the superfluous!
Go away from the bad odor! Withdraw from the steam of these human
sacrifices!
44
Open still remains the earth for great souls. There are still many empty
seats for the lonesome and the twosome, fanned by the fragrance of silent
seas.
Open still remains a free life for great souls. Truly, he who possesses
little is so much the less possessed: praised be a little poverty!
There, where the state ceases - there only commences the man who is
not superfluous: there commences the song of the necessary ones, the
single and irreplaceable melody.
There, where the state ceases - pray look there, my brothers! Do you
not see it, the rainbow and the bridges of the overman? -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 1, (12) THE FLIES IN THE MARKET-PLACE
Flee, my friend, into your solitude! I see you deafened with the noise of
the great men, and stung all over with the stings of the little ones.
Admirably do forest and rock know how to be silent with you.
Resemble again the tree which you love, the broad-branched one - silently
and attentively it overhangs the sea.
Where solitude ends, there begins the market-place; and where the
market-place begins, there begins also the noise of the great actors, and
the buzzing of the poison-flies.
In the world even the best things are worthless without those who represent
them: those showmen, the people call great men.
Little, do the people understand what is great - that is to say, the creating
agency. But they have a taste for all showmen and actors of great
things.
Around the inventors of new values revolves the world: - invisibly it
revolves. But around the actors revolve the people and the glory: such is
the course of things.
Spirit, has the actor, but little conscience of the spirit. He believes always
in that which he believes most strongly - in himself!
Tomorrow he has a new belief, and the day after, one still newer. Sharp
perceptions has he, like the people, and changeable humours.
To upset - that means with him to prove. To drive mad - that means
with him to convince. And blood is counted by him as the best of all
45
arguments.
A truth which only glides into sensitive ears, he calls a lie and nothing.
Truly, he believes only in gods that make a great noise in the world!
Full of ceremonial clowns is the market-place, - and the people glory in
their great men! These are for them the masters of the hour.
But the hour presses them; so they press you. And also from you they
want Yes or No. Alas. you would set your chair between For and
Against?
On account of those absolute and impatient ones, be not jealous, you
lover of truth! Never yet did truth cling to the arm of an absolute one.
On account of those abrupt ones, return into your security: only in the
market-place is one assailed by Yes? or No?
Slow is the experience of all deep fountains: long have they to wait until
they know what has fallen into their depths.
Away from the market-place and from fame takes place all that is
great: away from the market-Place and from fame have ever dwelt the
devisers of new values.
Flee, my friend, into your solitude: I see you stung all over by the poisonous
flies. Flee there, where a rough, strong breeze blows!
Flee into your solitude! you have lived too closely to the small and the
pitiable. Flee from their invisible vengeance! Towards you they have
nothing but vengeance.
Raise no longer an arm against them! Innumerable are they, and it is
not your lot to shoo flies.
Innumerable are the small and pitiable ones; and of many a proud
structure, rain-drops and weeds have been the ruin.
You are not stone; but already have you become hollow by the numerous
drops. you will yet break and burst by the numerous drops.
Exhausted I see you, by poisonous flies; bleeding I see you, and torn at
a hundred spots; and your pride will not even upbraid.
Blood they would have from you in all innocence; blood their bloodless
souls crave for - and they sting, therefore, in all innocence.
But you, profound one, you suffer too profoundly even from small
wounds; and ere you had recovered, the same poison-worm crawled
over your hand.
Too proud are you to kill these sweet-tooths. But take care lest it be
your fate to suffer all their poisonous injustice!
They buzz around you also with their praise: obtrusiveness is their
praise. They want to be close to your skin and your blood.
They flatter you, as one flatters a God or devil; they whimper before
46
you, as before a God or devil; What does it come to! Flatterers are they,
and whimperers, and nothing more.
Often, also, do they show themselves to you as amiable ones. But that
has ever been the prudence of the cowardly. Yes! the cowardly are wise!
They think much about you with their circumscribed souls - you are always
suspected by them! Whatever is much thought about is at last
thought suspicious.
They punish you for all your virtues. They pardon you in their inmost
hearts only - for your errors.
Because you are gentle and of upright character, you say: "Blameless
are they for their small existence." But their circumscribed souls think:
"Blamable is all great existence."
Even when you are gentle towards them, they still feel themselves despised
by you; and they repay your beneficence with secret maleficence.
Your silent pride is always counter to their taste; they rejoice if once
you be humble enough to be frivolous.
What we recognize in a man, we also irritate in him. Therefore be on
your guard against the small ones!
In your presence they feel themselves small, and their baseness gleams
and glows against you in invisible vengeance.
Saw you not how often they became dumb when you approached
them, and how their energy left them like the smoke of an extinguishing
fire?
Yes, my friend, the bad conscience are you of your neighbor; for they
are unworthy of you. Therefore they hate you, and would rather suck
your blood.
Your neighbor will always be poisonous flies; what is great in you -
that itself must make them more poisonous, and always more fly-like.
Flee, my friend, into your solitude - and there, where a rough strong
breeze blows. It is not your lot to shoo flies. -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 1, (13) CHASTITY
I love the forest. It is bad to live in cities: there, there are too many of
the lustful.
47
Is it not better to fall into the hands of a murderer than into the dreams
of a lustful woman?
And just look at these men: their eye says it - they know nothing better
on earth than to lie with a woman.
Filth is at the bottom of their souls; and Alas. if their filth has still spirit
in it!
Would that you were perfect - at least as animals! But to animals belongs
innocence.
Do I counsel you to slay your instincts? I counsel you to innocence in
your instincts.
Do I counsel you to chastity? Chastity is a virtue with some, but with
many almost a vice.
These are continent, to be sure: but doggish lust looks enviously out of
all that they do.
Even into the heights of their virtue and into their cold spirit does this
creature follow them, with its discord.
And how nicely can doggish lust beg for a piece of spirit, when a piece
of flesh is denied it!
You love tragedies and all that breaks the heart? But I am distrustful of
your doggish lust.
You have too cruel eyes, and you look wantonly towards the sufferers.
Has not your lust just disguised itself and taken the name of fellow-suffering?
And also this parable give I to you: Not a few who meant to cast out
their devil, went thereby into the swine themselves.
To whom chastity is difficult, it is to be dissuaded: lest it become the
road to hell - to filth and lust of soul.
Do I speak of filthy things? That is not the worst thing for me to do.
Not when the truth is filthy, but when it is shallow, does the discerning
one go unwillingly into its waters.
Truly, there are chaste ones from their very nature; they are gentler of
heart, and laugh better and more often than you.
They laugh also at chastity, and ask: "What is chastity?
Is chastity not folly? But the folly came to us, and not we to it.
We offered that guest harbor and heart: now it dwells with us - let it
stay as long as it will!" -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
48
Part 1, (14) THE FRIEND
"One is always too many about me" - thinks the anchorite. "Always
once one - that makes two in the long run!"
I and me are always too earnestly in conversation: how could it be endured,
if there were not a friend?
The friend of the hermit is always the third one: the third one is the
cork which prevents the conversation of the two sinking into the depth.
Ah! there are too many depths for all hermits. Therefore, do they long
so much for a friend and for his elevation.
Our faith in others betrays wherein we would rather have faith in
ourselves. Our longing for a friend is our betrayer.
And often with our love we want merely to overleap envy. And often
we attack and make ourselves enemies, to conceal that we are vulnerable.
"Be at least my enemy!" - thus speaks the true reverence, which does
not venture to solicit friendship.
If one would have a friend, then must one also be willing to wage war
for him: and in order to wage war, one must be capable of being an enemy.
One ought still to honor the enemy in one's friend. can you go nigh to
your friend, and not go over to him?
In one's friend one shall have one's best enemy. you shall be closest to
him with your heart when you withstand him.
You would wear no raiment before your friend? It is in honor of your
friend that you show yourself to him as you art? But he wishes you to
the devil on that account!
He who makes no secret of himself shocks: so much reason have you to
fear nakedness! Indeed, if you were gods, you could then be ashamed of
clothing!
You can not adorn yourself fine enough for your friend; for you shall
be to him an arrow and a longing for the overman.
Saw you ever your friend asleep - to know how he looks? What is usually
the countenance of your friend? It is your own countenance, in a
coarse and imperfect mirror.
Saw you ever your friend asleep? Were you not dismayed at your
friend looking so? O my friend, man is something that has to be
49
surpassed.
In divining and keeping silence shall the friend be a master: not
everything must you wish to see. your dream shall disclose to you what
your friend does when awake.
Let your pity be a divining: to know first if your friend wants pity. Perhaps
he loves in you the unmoved eye, and the look of eternity.
Let your pity for your friend be hid under a hard shell; you shall bite
out a tooth upon it. Thus will it have delicacy and sweetness.
Are you pure air and solitude and bread and medicine to your friend?
Many a one cannot loosen his own fetters, but is nevertheless his friend's
emancipator.
Are you a slave? Then you can not be a friend. are you a tyrant? Then
you can not have friends.
Far too long has there been a slave and a tyrant concealed in woman.
On that account woman is not yet capable of friendship: she knows only
love.
In woman's love there is injustice and blindness to all she does not
love. And even in woman's conscious love, there is still always surprise
and lightning and night, along with the light.
As yet woman is not capable of friendship: women are still cats and
birds. Or at the best, cows.
As yet woman is not capable of friendship. But tell me, you men, who
of you is capable of friendship?
Oh! your poverty, you men, and your sordidness of soul! As much as
you give to your friend, will I give even to my foe, and will not have become
poorer thereby.
There is comradeship: may there be friendship!
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 1, (15) THE THOUSAND AND ONE GOALS
Many lands saw Zarathustra, and many peoples: thus he discovered
the good and bad of many peoples. No greater power did Zarathustra
find on earth than good and bad.
No people could live without first valuing; if a people will maintain itself,
however, it must not value as its neighbor values.
50
Much that passed for good with one people was regarded with scorn
and contempt by another: thus I found it. Much found I here called bad,
which was there decked with purple honors.
Never did the one neighbor understand the other: ever did his soul
marvel at his neighbour's delusion and wickedness.
A table of excellencies hangs over every people. Behold. it is the table
of their triumphs; Behold. it is the voice of their Will to Power.
It is laudable, what they think hard; what is indispensable and hard
they call good; and what relieves in the direst distress, the unique and
hardest of all, - they extol as holy.
Whatever makes them rule and conquer and shine, to the dismay and
envy of their neighbor, they regard as the high and foremost thing, the
test and the meaning of all else.
Truly, my brother, if you knew but a people's need, its land, its sky,
and its neighbor, then would you divine the law of its surmountings,
and why it climbs up that ladder to its hope.
"Always shall you be the foremost and prominent above others: no one
shall your jealous soul love, except a friend" - that made the soul of a
Greek thrill: thereby went he his way to greatness.
"To speak truth, and be skillful with bow and arrow" - so seemed it
alike pleasing and hard to the people from whom comes my name - the
name which is alike pleasing and hard to me.
"To honor father and mother, and from the root of the soul to do their
will" - this table of surmounting hung another people over them, and became
powerful and permanent thereby.
"To have fidelity, and for the sake of fidelity to risk honor and blood,
even in evil and dangerous courses" - teaching itself so, another people
mastered itself, and thus mastering itself, became pregnant and heavy
with great hopes.
Truly, men have given to themselves all their good and bad. Truly,
they took it not, they found it not, it came not to them as a voice from
heaven.
Values did man only assign to things in order to maintain himself - he
created only the significance of things, a human significance! Therefore,
calls he himself "man," that is, the valuator.
Valuing is creating: hear it, you creating ones! Valuation itself is the
treasure and jewel of the valued things.
Through valuation only is there value; and without valuation the nut
of existence would be hollow. Hear it, you creating ones!
Change of values - that is, change of the creating ones. Always does he
51
destroy who has to be a creator.
Creating ones were first of all peoples, and only in late times individuals;
truly, the individual himself is still the latest creation.
Peoples once hung over them tables of the good. Love which would
rule and love which would obey, created for themselves such tables.
Older is the pleasure in the herd than the pleasure in the ego: and as
long as the good conscience is for the herd, the bad conscience only says:
ego.
Truly, the crafty ego, the loveless one, that seeks its advantage in the
advantage of many - it is not the origin of the herd, but its ruin.
Loving ones, was it always, and creating ones, that created good and
bad. Fire of love glows in the names of all the virtues, and fire of wrath.
Many lands saw Zarathustra, and many peoples: no greater power did
Zarathustra find on earth than the creations of the loving ones - "good"
and "bad" are they called.
Truly, a prodigy is this power of praising and blaming. Tell me, you
brothers, who will master it for me? Who will put a fetter upon the thousand
necks of this animal?
A thousand goals have there been thus far, for a thousand peoples
have there been. Only the fetter for the thousand necks is still lacking;
there is lacking the one goal. As yet humanity has not a goal.
But pray tell me, my brothers, if the goal of humanity be still lacking, is
there not also still lacking - humanity itself? -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 1, (16) NEIGHBOR-LOVE
You crowd around your neighbor, and have fine words for it. But I say
to you: your neighbor-love is your bad love of yourselves.
You flee to your neighbor from yourselves, and would rather make a
virtue thereof: but I fathom your "unselfishness."
The you is older than the I; the you has been consecrated, but not yet
the I: so man presses nigh to his neighbor.
Do I advise you to neighbor-love? Rather do I advise you to neighborflight
and to furthest love!
Higher than love to your neighbor is love to the furthest and future
52
ones; higher still than love to men, is love to things and phantoms.
The phantom that runs on before you, my brother, is fairer than you;
why do you not give to it your flesh and your bones? But you fear, and
run to your neighbor.
You cannot endure it with yourselves, and do not love yourselves sufficiently:
so you seek to mislead your neighbor into love, and would
rather gild yourselves with his error.
Would that you could not endure it with any kind of near ones, or their
neighbor; then would you have to create your friend and his overflowing
heart out of yourselves.
You call in a witness when you want to speak well of yourselves; and
when you have misled him to think well of you, you also think well of
yourselves.
Not only does he lie, who speaks contrary to his knowledge, but more
so, he who speaks contrary to his ignorance. And thus speak you of
yourselves in your intercourse, and belie your neighbor with yourselves.
Thus says the fool: "Association with men spoils the character, especially
when one has none."
The one goes to his neighbor because he seeks himself, and the other
because he would rather lose himself. Your bad love to yourselves makes
solitude a prison to you.
The furthest ones are they who pay for your love to the near ones; and
when there are but five of you together, a sixth must always die.
I love not your festivals either: too many actors found I there, and even
the spectators often behaved like actors.
Not the neighbor do I teach you, but the friend. Let the friend be the
festival of the earth to you, and a foretaste of the overman.
I teach you the friend and his overflowing heart. But one must know
how to be a sponge, if one would be loved by over-flowing hearts.
I teach you the friend in whom the world stands complete, a capsule of
the good, - the creating friend, who has always a complete world to bestow.
And as the world unrolled itself for him, so rolls it together again for
him in rings, as the growth of good through evil, as the growth of purpose
out of chance.
Let the future and the furthest be the motive of your today; in your
friend shall you love the overman as your motive.
My brothers, I advise you not to neighbor-love - I advise you to furthest
love! -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
53
Part 1, (17) THE WAY OF THE CREATING ONE
Would you go into isolation, my brother? would you seek the way to
yourself? Tarry yet a little and listen to me.
"He who seeks may easily get lost himself. All isolation is wrong": so
say the herd. And long did you belong to the herd.
The voice of the herd will still echo in you. And when you say, "I have
no longer a conscience in common with you," then will it be a plaint and
a pain.
Behold, that pain itself did the same conscience produce; and the last
gleam of that conscience still glows on your affliction.
But you would go the way of your affliction, which is the way to yourself?
Then show me your authority and your strength to do so!
Are you a new strength and a new authority? A first motion? A selfrolling
wheel? can you also compel stars to revolve around you?
Alas. there is so much lusting for loftiness! There are so many convulsions
of the ambitions! Show me that you are not a lusting and ambitious
one!
Alas. there are so many great thoughts that do nothing more than the
bellows: they inflate, and make emptier than ever.
Free, do you call yourself? your ruling thought would I hear of, and
not that you have escaped from a yoke.
Are you one entitled to escape from a yoke? Many a one has cast away
his final worth when he has cast away his servitude.
Free from what? What does that matter to Zarathustra! Clearly,
however, shall your eye show to me: free for what?
can you give to yourself your bad and your good, and set up your will
as a law over you? can you be judge for yourself, and avenger of your
law?
Terrible is aloneness with the judge and avenger of one's own law.
Thus is a star projected into desert space, and into the icy breath of
aloneness.
To-day suffer you still from the multitude, you individual; to-day have
you still your courage unabated, and your hopes.
But one day will the solitude weary you; one day will your pride yield,
and your courage quail. you will one day cry: "I am alone!"
54
One day will you see no longer your loftiness, and see too closely your
lowliness; your sublimity itself will frighten you as a phantom. you will
one day cry: "All is false!"
There are feelings which seek to slay the lonesome one; if they do not
succeed, then must they themselves die! But are you capable of it - to be
a murderer?
have you ever known, my brother, the word "disdain"? And the anguish
of your justice in being just to those that disdain you?
You force many to think differently about you; that, charge they heavily
to your account. you came nigh to them, and yet went past: for that
they never forgive you.
You go beyond them: but the higher you rise, the smaller does the eye
of envy see you. Most of all, however, is the flying one hated.
"How could you be just to me!" - must you say - "I choose your injustice
as my allotted portion.
Injustice and filth cast they at the lonesome one: but, my brother, if you
would be a star, you must shine for them none the less on that account!
And be on your guard against the good and just! They would rather
crucify those who devise their own virtue - they hate the lonesome ones.
Be on your guard, also, against holy simplicity! All is unholy to it that
is not simple; rather, likewise, would it play with the fire - of the fagot
and stake.
And be on your guard, also, against the assaults of your love! Too readily
does the recluse reach his hand to anyone who meets him.
To many a one may you not give your hand, but only your paw; and I
wish your paw also to have claws.
But the worst enemy you can meet, will you yourself always be; you
waylay yourself in caverns and forests.
You lonesome one, you go the way to yourself! And past yourself and
your seven devils leads your way!
A heretic will you be to yourself, and a wizard and a soothsayer, and a
fool, and a doubter, and a reprobate, and a villain.
Ready must you be to burn yourself in your own flame; how could you
become new if you have not first become ashes!
You lonesome one, you go the way of the creating one: a God will you
create for yourself out of your seven devils!
You lonesome one, you go the way of the loving one: you love yourself,
and on that account despise you yourself, as only the loving ones
despise.
To create, desires the loving one, because he despises! What knows he
55
of love who has not been obliged to despise just what he loved!
With your love, go into your isolation, my brother, and with your creating;
and late only will justice limp after you.
With my tears, go into your isolation, my brother. I love him who seeks
to create beyond himself, and thus succumbs. -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 1, (18) OLD AND YOUNG WOMEN
Why steal you along so furtively in the twilight, Zarathustra? And
what hide you so carefully under your mantle?
Is it a treasure that has been given you? Or a child that has been born
you? Or go you yourself on a thief's errand, you friend of the evil?-
Truly, my brother, said Zarathustra, it is a treasure that has been given
me: it is a little truth which I carry.
But it is naughty, like a young child; and if I hold not its mouth, it
screams too loudly.
As I went on my way alone today, at the hour when the sun declines,
there met me an old woman, and she spoke thus to my soul:
"Much has Zarathustra spoken also to us women, but never spoke he to
us concerning woman."
And I answered her: "Concerning woman, one should only talk to
men."
"Talk also to me of woman," said she; "I am old enough to forget it
presently."
And I obliged the old woman and spoke thus to her:
Everything in woman is a riddle, and everything in woman has one
solution - it is called pregnancy.
Man is for woman a means: the purpose is always the child. But what
is woman for man?
Two different things wants the true man: danger and diversion. Therefore
wants he woman, as the most dangerous plaything.
Man shall be trained for war, and woman for the recreation of the warrior:
all else is folly.
Too sweet fruits - these the warrior likes not. Therefore likes he woman;
- bitter is even the sweetest woman.
Better than man does woman understand children, but man is more
56
childish than woman.
In the true man there is a child hidden: it wants to play. Up then, you
women, and discover the child in man!
A plaything let woman be, pure and fine like the precious stone, illumined
with the virtues of a world not yet come.
Let the beam of a star shine in your love! Let your hope say: "May I
bear the overman!"
In your love let there be valour! With your love shall you assail him
who inspires you with fear!
In your love be your honor! Little does woman understand otherwise
about honor. But let this be your honor: always to love more than you
are loved, and never be the second.
Let man fear woman when she loves: then makes she every sacrifice,
and everything else she regards as worthless.
Let man fear woman when she hats: for man in his innermost soul is
merely evil; woman, however, is mean.
Whom hats woman most? - Thus spoke the iron to the loadstone: "I
hate you most, because you attract, but are too weak to draw to you."
The happiness of man is, "I will." The happiness of woman is, "He will."
"Behold. "Behold. now has the world become perfect!" - thus thinks
every woman when she obeys with all her love.
Obey, must the woman, and find a depth for her surface. Surface is
woman's soul, a mobile, stormy film on shallow water.
Man's soul, however, is deep, its current gushes in subterranean caverns:
woman surmises its force, but comprehends it not.-
Then answered me the old woman: "Many fine things has Zarathustra
said, especially for those who are young enough for them.
Strange! Zarathustra knows little about woman, and yet he is right
about them! does this happen, because with women nothing is impossible?
And now accept a little truth by way of thanks! I am old enough for it!
Swaddle it up and hold its mouth: otherwise it will scream too loudly,
the little truth."
"Give me, woman, your little truth!" said I. And thus spoke the old woman:
"you go to women? Do not forget your whip!" -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
57
Part 1, (19) THE BITE OF THE ADDER
One day had Zarathustra fallen asleep under a fig-tree, owing to the
heat, with his arm over his face. And there came an adder and bit him in
the neck, so that Zarathustra screamed with pain. When he had taken his
arm from his face he looked at the serpent; and then did it recognize the
eyes of Zarathustra, wriggled awkwardly, and tried to get away. "Not at
all," said Zarathustra, "as yet have you not received my thanks! you have
awakened me in time; my journey is yet long." "your journey is short,"
said the adder sadly; "my poison is fatal." Zarathustra smiled. "When did
ever a dragon die of a serpent's poison?" - said he. "But take your poison
back! you are not rich enough to present it to me." Then fell the adder
again on his neck, and licked his wound.
When Zarathustra once told this to his disciples they asked him: "And
what, O Zarathustra, is the moral of your story?" And Zarathustra
answered them thus:
The destroyer of morality, the good and just call me: my story is immoral.
When, however, you have an enemy, then return him not good for evil:
for that would abash him. But prove that he has done something good to
you.
And rather be angry than abash any one! And when you are cursed, it
pleases me not that you should then desire to bless. Rather curse a little
also!
And should a great injustice befall you, then do quickly five small ones
besides. Hideous to behold is he on whom injustice presses alone.
Did you ever know this? Shared injustice is half justice. And he who
can bear it, shall take the injustice upon himself!
A small revenge is more human than no revenge at all. And if the punishment
be not also a right and an honor to the transgressor, I do not like
your punishing.
Nobler is it to own oneself in the wrong than to establish one's right,
especially if one be in the right. Only, one must be rich enough to do so.
I do not like your cold justice; out of the eye of your judges there always
glances the executioner and his cold steel.
Tell me: where find we justice, which is love with seeing eyes?
Devise me, then, the love which not only bears all punishment, but also
all guilt!
58
Devise me, then, the justice which acquits everyone except the judge!
And would you hear this likewise? To him who seeks to be just from
the heart, even the lie becomes philanthropy.
But how could I be just from the heart! How can I give everyone his
own! Let this be enough for me: I give to everyone my own.
Finally, my brothers, guard against doing wrong to any anchorite.
How could an hermit forget! How could he requite!
Like a deep well is an anchorite. Easy is it to throw in a stone: if it
should sink to the bottom, however, tell me, who will bring it out again?
Guard against injuring the anchorite! If you have done so, however,
well then, kill him also! -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 1, (20) CHILD AND MARRIAGE
I have a question for you alone, my brother: like a sounding-lead, cast I
this question into your soul, that I may know its depth.
You are young, and desire child and marriage. But I ask you: are you a
man entitled to desire a child?
Are you the victorious one, the self-conqueror, the ruler of your passions,
the master of your virtues? Thus do I ask you.
Or does the animal speak in your wish, and necessity? Or isolation? Or
discord in you?
I would have your victory and freedom long for a child. Living monuments
shall you build to your victory and emancipation.
Beyond yourself shall you build. But first of all must you be built yourself,
rectangular in body and soul.
Not only onward shall you propagate yourself, but upward! For that
purpose may the garden of marriage help you!
A higher body shall you create, a first movement, a spontaneously
rolling wheel - a creating one shall you create.
Marriage: so call I the will of the twain to create the one that is more
than those who created it. The reverence for one another, as those exercising
such a will, call I marriage.
Let this be the significance and the truth of your marriage. But that
which the many-too-many call marriage, those superfluous ones - ah,
what shall I call it?
59
Ah, the poverty of soul in the twain! Ah, the filth of soul in the twain!
Ah, the pitiable self-complacency in the twain!
Marriage they call it all; and they say their marriages are made in heaven.
Well, I do not like it, that heaven of the superfluous! No, I do not like
them, those animals tangled in the heavenly toils!
Far from me also be the God who limps there to bless what he has not
matched!
Laugh not at such marriages! What child has not had reason to weep
over its parents?
Worthy did this man seem, and ripe for the meaning of the earth: but
when I saw his wife, the earth seemed to me a home for madcaps.
Yes, I would that the earth shook with convulsions when a saint and a
goose mate with one another.
This one went forth in quest of truth as a hero, and at last got for himself
a small decked-up lie: his marriage he calls it.
That one was reserved in intercourse and chose choicely. But one time
he spoilt his company for all time: his marriage he calls it.
Another sought a handmaid with the virtues of an angel. But all at
once he became the handmaid of a woman, and now would he need also
to become an angel.
Careful, have I found all buyers, and all of them have astute eyes. But
even the most astute of them buys his wife in a sack.
Many short follies - that is called love by you. And your marriage putts
an end to many short follies, with one long stupidity.
Your love to woman, and woman's love to man - ah, would that it were
sympathy for suffering and veiled deities! But generally two animals
alight on one another.
But even your best love is only an enraptured simile and a painful ardour.
It is a torch to light you to loftier paths.
Beyond yourselves shall you love some day! Then learn first of all to
love. And on that account you had to drink the bitter cup of your love.
Bitterness is in the cup even of the best love; thus does it cause longing
for the overman; thus does it cause thirst in you, the creating one!
Thirst in the creating one, arrow and longing for the overman: tell me,
my brother, is this your will to marriage?
Holy call I such a will, and such a marriage. -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
60
Part 1, (21) VOLUNTARY DEATH
Many die too late, and some die too early. Yet strange sounds the precept:
"Die at the right time!
Die at the right time: so teaches Zarathustra.
To be sure, he who never lives at the right time, how could he ever die
at the right time? Would that he might never be born! - Thus do I advise
the superfluous ones.
But even the superfluous ones make much ado about their death, and
even the hollowest nut wants to be cracked.
Every one regards dying as a great matter: but as yet death is not a festival.
Not yet have people learned to inaugurate the finest festivals.
The consummating death I show to you, which becomes a stimulus
and promise to the living.
His death, dies the consummating one triumphantly, surrounded by
hoping and promising ones.
Thus should one learn to die; and there should be no festival at which
such a dying one does not consecrate the oaths of the living!
Thus to die is best; the next best, however, is to die in battle, and sacrifice
a great soul.
But to the fighter equally hateful as to the victor, is your grinning death
which steals nigh like a thief, - and yet comes as master.
My death, praise I to you, the voluntary death, which comes to me because
I want it.
And when shall I want it? - He that has a goal and an heir, wants death
at the right time for the goal and the heir.
And out of reverence for the goal and the heir, he will hang up no more
withered wreaths in the sanctuary of life.
Truly, not the rope-makers will I resemble: they lengthen out their
cord, and thereby go ever backward.
Many a one, also, waxes too old for his truths and triumphs; a toothless
mouth has no longer the right to every truth.
And whoever wants to have fame, must take leave of honor betimes,
and practise the difficult art of - going at the right time.
One must discontinue being feasted upon when one tastes best: that is
known by those who want to be long loved.
Sour apples are there, no doubt, whose lot is to wait until the last day
of autumn: and at the same time they become ripe, yellow, and
61
shrivelled.
In some ages the heart first, and in others the spirit. And some are
hoary in youth, but the late young keep long young.
To many men life is a failure; a poison-worm gnaws at their heart.
Then let them see to it that their dying is all the more a success.
Many never become sweet; they rot even in the summer. It is cowardice
that holds them fast to their branches.
Far too many live, and far too long hang they on their branches. Would
that a storm came and shook all this rottenness and worm-eatenness
from the tree!
Would that there came preachers of speedy death! Those would be the
appropriate storms and agitators of the trees of life! But I hear only slow
death preached, and patience with all that is "earthly."
Ah! you preach patience with what is earthly? This earthly is it that has
too much patience with you, you blasphemers!
Truly, too early died that Hebrew whom the preachers of slow death
honor: and to many has it proved a calamity that he died too early.
As yet had he known only tears, and the melancholy of the Hebrews,
together with the hatred of the good and just - the Hebrew Jesus: then
was he seized with the longing for death.
Had he but remained in the wilderness, and far from the good and just!
Then, perhaps, would he have learned to live, and love the earth - and
laughter also!
Believe it, my brothers! He died too early; he himself would have disavowed
his doctrine had he attained to my age! Noble enough was he to
disavow!
But he was still immature. Immaturely loves the youth, and immaturely
also hats he man and earth. Confined and awkward are still his
soul and the wings of his spirit.
But in man there is more of the child than in the youth, and less of melancholy:
better understands he about life and death.
Free for death, and free in death; a holy Naysayer, when there is no
longer time for Yes: thus understands he about death and life.
That your dying may not be a reproach to man and the earth, my
friends: that do I solicit from the honey of your soul.
In your dying shall your spirit and your virtue still shine like an
evening after-glow around the earth: otherwise your dying has been unsatisfactory.
Thus will I die myself, that you friends may love the earth more for my
sake; and earth will I again become, to have rest in her that bore me.
62
Truly, a goal had Zarathustra; he threw his ball. Now be you friends
the heirs of my goal; to you throw I the golden ball.
Best of all, do I see you, my friends, throw the golden ball! And so tarry
I still a little while on the earth - pardon me for it!
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 1, (22) THE BESTOWING VIRTUE
1.
When Zarathustra had taken leave of the town to which his heart was
attached, the name of which is "The Pied Cow," there followed him many
people who called themselves his disciples, and kept him company.
Thus came they to a crossroads. Then Zarathustra told them that he now
wanted to go alone; for he was fond of going alone. His disciples,
however, presented him at his departure with a staff, on the golden
handle of which a serpent twined round the sun. Zarathustra rejoiced on
account of the staff, and supported himself thereon; then spoke he thus
to his disciples:
Tell me, pray: how came gold to the highest value? Because it is uncommon,
and unprofiting, and beaming, and soft in lustre; it always bestows
itself.
Only as image of the highest virtue came gold to the highest value.
Goldlike, beams the glance of the bestower. Gold-lustre makes peace
between moon and sun.
Uncommon is the highest virtue, and unprofiting, beaming is it, and
soft of lustre: a bestowing virtue is the highest virtue.
Truly, I divine you well, my disciples: you strive like me for the bestowing
virtue. What should you have in common with cats and wolves?
It is your thirst to become sacrifices and gifts yourselves: and therefore
have you the thirst to accumulate all riches in your soul.
Insatiably strives your soul for treasures and jewels, because your virtue
is insatiable in desiring to bestow.
You constrain all things to flow towards you and into you, so that they
shall flow back again out of your fountain as the gifts of your love.
Truly, an appropriator of all values must such bestowing. love become;
but healthy and holy, call I this selfishness.-
Another selfishness is there, an all-too-poor and hungry kind, which
63
would always steal - the selfishness of the sick, the sickly selfishness.
With the eye of the thief it looks upon all that is lustrous; with the craving
of hunger it measures him who has abundance; and ever does it
prowl round the tables of bestowers.
Sickness speaks in such craving, and invisible degeneration; of a sickly
body, speaks the larcenous craving of this selfishness.
Tell me, my brother, what do we think bad, and worst of all? Is it not
degeneration? - And we always suspect degeneration when the bestowing
soul is lacking.
Upward goes our course from genera on to super-genera. But a horror
to us is the degenerating sense, which says: "All for myself."
Upward soars our sense: thus is it a simile of our body, a simile of an
elevation. Such similes of elevations are the names of the virtues.
Thus goes the body through history, a becomer and fighter. And the
spirit - what is it to the body? Its fights' and victories' herald, its companion
and echo.
Similes, are all names of good and evil; they do not speak out, they
only hint. A fool who seeks knowledge from them!
Give heed, my brothers, to every hour when your spirit would speak in
similes: there is the origin of your virtue.
Elevated is then your body, and raised up; with its delight, enraptures
it the spirit; so that it becomes creator, and valuer, and lover, and
everything's benefactor.
When your heart overflows broad and full like the river, a blessing and
a danger to the lowlanders: there is the origin of your virtue.
When you are exalted above praise and blame, and your will would
command all things, as a loving one's will: there is the origin of your virtue.
When you despise pleasant things, and the effeminate couch, and cannot
couch far enough from the effeminate: there is the origin of your virtue.
When you are willers of one will, and when that change of every need
is needful to you: there is the origin of your virtue.
Truly, a new good and evil is it! Truly, a new deep murmuring, and the
voice of a new fountain!
Power is it, this new virtue; a ruling thought is it, and around it a
subtle soul: a golden sun, with the serpent of knowledge around it.
2.
Here paused Zarathustra awhile, and looked lovingly on his disciples.
Then he continued to speak thus - and his voice had changed:
64
Remain true to the earth, my brothers, with the power of your virtue!
Let your bestowing love and your knowledge be devoted to be the
meaning of the earth! Thus do I pray and appeal to you.
Let it not fly away from the earthly and beat against eternal walls with
its wings! Ah, there has always been so much flown-away virtue!
Lead, like me, the flown-away virtue back to the earth - yes, back to
body and life: that it may give to the earth its meaning, a human meaning!
A hundred times thus far has spirit as well as virtue flown away and
blundered. Alas. in our body dwells still all this delusion and blundering:
body and will has it there become.
A hundred times thus far has spirit as well as virtue attempted and
erred. Yes, an attempt has man been. Alas, much ignorance and error has
become embodied in us!
Not only the rationality of millennia - also their madness, breaks out in
us. Dangerous is it to be an heir.
Still fight we step by step with the giant Chance, and over all mankind
has thus far ruled nonsense, the lack-of-sense.
Let your spirit and your virtue be devoted to the sense of the earth, my
brothers: let the value of everything be determined anew by you! Therefore
shall you be fighters! Therefore shall you be creators!
Intelligently does the body purify itself; attempting with intelligence it
exalts itself; to the discerners all impulses sanctify themselves; to the exalted
the soul becomes joyful.
Physician, heal yourself: then will you also heal your patient. Let it be
his best cure to see with his eyes him who makes himself whole.
A thousand paths are there which have never yet been trodden; a thousand
salubrities and hidden islands of life. Unexhausted and undiscovered
is still man and man's world.
Awake and listen, you lonesome ones! From the future come winds
with stealthy pinions, and to fine ears good tidings are proclaimed.
You lonesome ones of today, you seceding ones, you shall one day be a
people: out of you who have chosen yourselves, shall a chosen people
arise: - and out of it the overman.
Truly, a place of healing shall the earth become! And already is a new
odor diffused around it, a salvation-bringing odor - and a new hope!
3.
When Zarathustra had spoken these words, he paused, like one who
had not said his last word; and long did he balance the staff doubtfully
in his hand. At last he spoke thus - and his voice had changed:
65
I now go alone, my disciples! you also now go away, and alone! So will
I have it.
Truly, I advise you: depart from me, and guard yourselves against
Zarathustra! And better still: be ashamed of him! Perhaps he has deceived
you.
The man of knowledge must be able not only to love his enemies, but
also to hate his friends.
One pays back a teacher badly if one remain merely a scholar. And
why will you not pluck at my wreath?
You venerate me; but what if your veneration should some day collapse?
Take heed lest a statue crush you!
You say, you believe in Zarathustra? But of what account is Zarathustra!
you are my believers: but of what account are all believers!
You had not yet sought yourselves: then did you find me. So do all believers;
therefore all belief is of so little account.
Now do I bid you lose me and find yourselves; and only when you
have all denied me, will I return to you.
Truly, with other eyes, my brothers, shall I then seek my lost ones; with
another love shall I then love you.
And once again shall you have become friends to me, and children of
one hope: then will I be with you for the third time, to celebrate the great
noontide with you.
And it is the great noontide, when man is in the midd2\le of his course
between animal and overman, and celebrates his advance to the evening
as his highest hope: for it is the advance to a new morning.
At such time will the down-goer bless himself, that he should be an
over-goer; and the sun of his knowledge will be at noontide.
"Dead are all the Gods: now do we desire the overman to live." - Let
this be our final will at the great noontide! -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
66
Second Part
THUS SPOKE ZARATHUSTRA
SECOND PART
1. The Child With The Mirror
2. In The Happy Isles
3. The Pitiful
4. The Priests
5. The Virtuous
6. The Rabble
7. The Tarantulas
8. The Famous Wise Ones
9. The Night-Song
10. The Dance-Song
11. The Grave-Song
12. Self-Surpassing
13. The Sublime Ones
14. The Land Of Culture
15. Immaculate Perception
16. Scholars
17. Poets
18. Great Events
19. The Soothsayer
20. Redemption
21. Manly Prudence
22. The Stillest Hour
Part 2, (1) THE CHILD WITH THE MIRROR
AFTER this Zarathustra returned again into the mountains to the
solitude of his cave, and withdrew himself from men, waiting like a
sower who has scattered his seed. His soul, however, became impatient
and full of longing for those whom he loved: because he had still much
to give them. For this is hardest of all: to close the open hand out of love,
and keep modest as a giver.
Thus passed with the lonesome one months and years; his wisdom
meanwhile increased, and caused him pain by its abundance.
67
One morning, however, he awoke ere the rosy dawn, and having meditated
long on his couch, at last spoke thus to his heart:
Why did I startle in my dream, so that I awoke? Did not a child come to
me, carrying a mirror?
"O Zarathustra" - said the child to me - "look at yourself in the mirror!"
But when I looked into the mirror, I shrieked, and my heart throbbed:
for not myself did I see therein, but a devil's grimace and derision.
Truly, all too well do I understand the dream's portent and monition:
my doctrine is in danger; tares want to be called wheat!
My enemies have grown powerful and have disfigured the likeness of
my doctrine, so that my dearest ones have to blush for the gifts that I
gave them.
Lost are my friends; the hour has come for me to seek my lost ones!-
With these words Zarathustra started up, not however like a person in
anguish seeking relief, but rather like a seer and a singer whom the spirit
inspires. With amazement did his eagle and serpent gaze upon him: for a
coming bliss overspread his countenance like the rosy dawn.
What has happened to me, my animals? - said Zarathustra. Am I not
transformed? has not bliss come to me like a whirlwind?
Foolish is my happiness, and foolish things will it speak: it is still too
young - so have patience with it!
Wounded am I by my happiness: all sufferers shall be physicians to
me!
To my friends can I again go down, and also to my enemies! Zarathustra
can again speak and bestow, and show his best love to his loved ones!
My impatient love overflows in streams, - down towards sunrise and
sunset. Out of silent mountains and storms of affliction, rushes my soul
into the valleys.
Too long have I longed and looked into the distance. Too long has
solitude possessed me: thus have I unlearned to keep silence.
Utterance have I become altogether, and the brawling of a brook from
high rocks: downward into the valleys will I hurl my speech.
And let the stream of my love sweep into unfrequented channels! How
should a stream not finally find its way to the sea!
Indeed, there is a lake in me, sequestered and self-sufficing; but the
stream of my love bears this along with it, down - to the sea!
New paths do I tread, a new speech comes to me; tired have I become -
like all creators - of the old tongues. No longer will my spirit walk on
worn-out soles.
Too slowly runs all speaking for me: - into your chariot, O storm, do I
68
leap! And even you will I whip with my spite!
Like a cry and an huzza will I traverse wide seas, till I find the Happy
Isles where my friends sojourn;-
And my enemies among them! How I now love everyone to whom I
may but speak! Even my enemies pertain to my bliss.
And when I want to mount my wildest horse, then does my spear always
help me up best: it is my foot's ever ready servant:-
The spear which I hurl at my enemies! How grateful am I to my enemies
that I may at last hurl it!
Too great has been the tension of my cloud: between laughters of lightnings
will I cast hail-showers into the depths.
Violently will my breast then heave; violently will it blow its storm
over the mountains: thus comes its assuagement.
Truly, like a storm comes my happiness, and my freedom! But my enemies
shall think that the evil one roars over their heads.
Yes, you also, my friends, will be alarmed by my wild wisdom; and
perhaps you will flee from it, along with my enemies.
Ah, that I knew how to lure you back with shepherds' flutes! Ah, that
my lioness wisdom would learn to roar softly! And much have we
already learned with one another!
My wild wisdom became pregnant on the lonesome mountains; on the
rough stones did she bear the youngest of her young.
Now runs she foolishly in the arid wilderness, and seeks and seeks the
soft sward - my old, wild wisdom!
On the soft sward of your hearts, my friends! - on your love, would she
rather couch her dearest one! -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 2, (2) IN THE HAPPY ISLES
THE figs fall from the trees, they are good and sweet; and in falling the
red skins of them break. A north wind am I to ripe figs.
Thus, like figs, do these doctrines fall for you, my friends: imbibe now
their juice and their sweet substance! It is autumn all around, and clear
sky, and afternoon.
Behold, what fullness is around us! And out of the midst of superabundance,
it is delightful to look out upon distant seas.
69
Once did people say God, when they looked out upon distant seas;
now, however, have I taught you to say, overman.
God is a conjecture: but I do not wish your conjecturing to reach beyond
your creating will.
Could you create a God? - Then, I pray you, be silent about all gods!
But you could well create the overman.
Not perhaps you yourselves, my brothers! But into fathers and forefathers
of the overman could you transform yourselves: and let that be
your best creating!-
God is a conjecture: but I should like your conjecturing restricted to the
conceivable.
Could you conceive a God? - But let this mean Will to Truth to you,
that everything be transformed into the humanly conceivable, the humanly
visible, the humanly sensible! Your own discernment shall you
follow out to the end!
And what you have called the world shall but be created by you: your
reason, your likeness, your will, your love, shall it itself become! And
truly, for your bliss, you discerning ones!
And how would you endure life without that hope, you discerning
ones? Neither in the inconceivable could you have been born, nor in the
irrational.
But that I may reveal my heart entirely to you, my friends: if there were
gods, how could I endure it to be no God! Therefore there are no gods.
Yes, I have drawn the conclusion; now, however, does it draw me.-
God is a conjecture: but who could drink all the bitterness of this conjecture
without dying? Shall his faith be taken from the creating one, and
from the eagle his flights into eagle-heights?
God is a thought - it makes all the straight crooked, and all that stands
reel. What? Time would be gone, and all the perishable would be but a
lie?
To think this is giddiness and vertigo to human limbs, and even vomiting
to the stomach: truly, the reeling sickness do I call it, to conjecture
such a thing.
Evil do I call it and misanthropic: all that teaching about the one, and
the plenum, and the unmoved, and the sufficient, and the imperishable!
All the imperishable - that's but a simile, and the poets lie too much.-
But of time and of becoming shall the best similes speak: a praise shall
they be, and a justification of all perishableness!
Creating - that is the great salvation from suffering, and life's alleviation.
But for the creator to appear, suffering itself is needed, and much
70
transformation.
Yes, much bitter dying must there be in your life, you creators! Thus
are you advocates and justifiers of all perishableness.
For the creator himself to be the new-born child, he must also be willing
to be the child-bearer, and endure the pangs of the child-bearer.
Truly, through a hundred souls went I my way, and through a hundred
cradles and birth-throes. Many a farewell have I taken; I know the
heart-breaking last hours.
But so wills it my creating Will, my fate. Or, to tell you it more candidly:
just such a fate - wills my Will.
All feeling suffers in me, and is in prison: but my willing ever comes to
me as my emancipator and comforter.
Willing emancipates: that is the true doctrine of will and emancipation
- so teaches you Zarathustra.
No longer willing, and no longer valuing, and no longer creating! Ah,
that that great debility may ever be far from me!
And also in discerning do I feel only my will's procreating and
evolving delight; and if there be innocence in my knowledge, it is because
there is will to procreation in it.
Away from God and gods did this will allure me; what would there be
to create if there were - gods!
But to man does it ever impel me anew, my fervent creative will; thus
impels it the hammer to the stone.
Ah, you men, within the stone slumbers an image for me, the image of
my visions! Ah, that it should slumber in the hardest, ugliest stone!
Now rags my hammer ruthlessly against its prison. From the stone fly
the fragments: what's that to me?
I will complete it: for a shadow came to me - the stillest and lightest of
all things once came to me!
The beauty of the overman came to me as a shadow. Ah, my brothers!
Of what account now are - the gods to me! -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 2, (3) THE PITIFUL
MY FRIENDS, there has arisen a satire on your friend: "Behold
Zarathustra! Walks he not among us as if among animals?"
71
But it is better said in this wise: "The discerning one walks among men
as among animals."
Man himself is to the discerning one: the animal with red cheeks.
How has that happened to him? Is it not because he has had to be
ashamed too oft?
O my friends! Thus speaks the discerning one: shame, shame, shame -
that is the history of man!
And on that account does the noble one enjoin on himself not to abash:
bashfulness does he enjoin himself in presence of all sufferers.
Truly, I like them not, the merciful ones, whose bliss is in their pity: too
destitute are they of bashfulness.
If I must be pitiful, I dislike to be called so; and if I be so, it is preferably
at a distance.
Preferably also do I shroud my head, and flee, before being recognized:
and thus do I bid you do, my friends!
May my destiny ever lead unafflicted ones like you across my path,
and those with whom I may have hope and repast and honey in common!
Truly, I have done this and that for the afflicted: but something better
did I always seem to do when I had learned to enjoy myself better.
Since humanity came into being, man has enjoyed himself too little:
that alone, my brothers, is our original sin!
And when we learn better to enjoy ourselves, then do we unlearn best
to give pain to others, and to contrive pain.
Therefore do I wash the hand that has helped the sufferer; therefore do
I wipe also my soul.
For in seeing the sufferer suffering - thereof was I ashamed on account
of his shame; and in helping him, sorely did I wound his pride.
Great obligations do not make grateful, but revengeful; and when a
small kindness is not forgotten, it becomes a gnawing worm.
"Be shy in accepting! Distinguish by accepting!" - thus do I advise those
who have naught to bestow.
I, however, am a bestower: willingly do I bestow as friend to friends.
Strangers, however, and the poor, may pluck for themselves the fruit
from my tree: thus does it cause less shame.
Beggars, however, one should entirely do away with! Truly, it annoys
one to give to them, and it annoys one not to give to them.
And likewise sinners and bad consciences! Believe me, my friends: the
sting of conscience teaches one to sting.
The worst things, however, are the petty thoughts. Truly, better to have
72
done evilly than to have thought pettily!
To be sure, you say: "The delight in petty evils spars one many a great
evil deed." But here one should not wish to be sparing.
Like a boil is the evil deed: it itches and irritates and breaks forth - it
speaks honorably.
"Behold, I am disease," says the evil deed: that is its honorableness.
But like infection is the petty thought: it creeps and hides, and wants to
be nowhere - until the whole body is decayed and withered by the petty
infection.
To him however, who is possessed of a devil, I would whisper this
word in the ear: "Better for you to rear up your devil! Even for you there
is still a path to greatness!"-
Ah, my brothers! One knows a little too much about every one! And
many a one becomes transparent to us, but still we can by no means penetrate
him.
It is difficult to live among men because silence is so difficult.
And not to him who is offensive to us are we most unfair, but to him
who does not concern us at all.
If, however, you have a suffering friend, then be a resting-place for his
suffering; like a hard bed, however, a camp-bed: thus will you serve him
best.
And if a friend does you wrong, then say: "I forgive you what you have
done to me; that you have done it to yourself, however - how could I forgive
that!"
Thus speaks all great love: it surpasses even forgiveness and pity.
One should hold fast one's heart; for when one lets it go, how quickly
does one's head run away!
Ah, where in the world have there been greater follies than with the pitiful?
And what in the world has caused more suffering than the follies
of the pitiful?
Woe to all loving ones who have not an elevation which is above their
pity!
Thus spoke the devil to me, once on a time: "Even God has his hell: it is
his love for man."
And lately, did I hear him say these words: "God is dead: of his pity for
man has God died."-
So be you warned against pity: from thence there yet comes to men a
heavy cloud! Truly, I understand weather-signs!
But attend also to this word: All great love is above all its pity: for it
seeks - to create what is loved!
73
"Myself do I offer to my love, and my neighbor as myself" - such is the
language of all creators.
All creators, however, are hard. -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 2, (4) THE PRIESTS
AND one day Zarathustra made a sign to his disciples and spoke these
words to them:
"Here are priests: but although they are my enemies, pass them quietly
and with sleeping swords!
Even among them there are heroes; many of them have suffered too
much: - so they want to make others suffer.
Bad enemies are they: nothing is more revengeful than their meekness.
And readily does he soil himself who touches them.
But my blood is related to theirs; and I want withal to see my blood
honored in theirs."-
And when they had passed, a pain attacked Zarathustra; but not long
had he struggled with the pain, when he began to speak thus:
It moves my heart for those priests. They also go against my taste; but
that is the smallest matter to me, since I am among men.
But I suffer and have suffered with them: prisoners are they to me, and
stigmatized ones. He whom they call Saviour put them in fetters:-
In fetters of false values and fatuous words! Oh, that someone would
save them from their Saviour!
On an isle they once thought they had landed, when the sea tossed
them about; but behold, it was a slumbering monster!
False values and fatuous words: these are the worst monsters for mortals
- long slumbers and waits the fate that is in them.
But at last it comes and awakes and devours and engulfs whatever has
built tabernacles upon it.
Oh, just look at those tabernacles which those priests have built themselves!
Churches, they call their sweet-smelling caves!
Oh, that falsified light, that mustified air! Where the soul - may not fly
aloft to its height!
But so enjoins their belief: "On your knees, up the stair, you sinners!"
Truly, rather would I see a shameless one than the distorted eyes of
74
their shame and devotion!
Who created for themselves such caves and penitence-stairs? Was it not
those who sought to conceal themselves, and were ashamed under the
clear sky?
And only when the clear sky looks again through ruined roofs, and
down upon grass and red poppies on ruined walls - will I again turn my
heart to the seats of this God.
They called God that which opposed and afflicted them: and truly,
there was much hero-spirit in their worship!
And they knew not how to love their God otherwise than by nailing
men to the cross!
As corpses they thought to live; in black draped they their corpses;
even in their talk do I still feel the evil favor of charnel-houses.
And he who lives close to them lives close to black pools, wherein the
toad sings his song with sweet gravity.
Better songs would they have to sing, for me to believe in their Saviour:
more! like saved ones would his disciples have to appear to me!
Naked, would I like to see them: for beauty alone should preach penitence.
But whom would that disguised affliction convince!
Truly, their saviors themselves came not from freedom and freedom's
seventh heaven! Truly, they themselves never trod the carpets of knowledge!
Of defects did the spirit of those saviors consist; but into every defect
had they put their illusion, their stop-gap, which they called God.
In their pity was their spirit drowned; and when they swelled and
overswelled with pity, there always floated to the surface a great folly.
Eagerly and with shouts drove they their flock over their foot-bridge;
as if there were but one foot-bridge to the future! Truly, those shepherds
also were still of the flock!
Small spirits and spacious souls had those shepherds: but, my brothers,
what small domains have even the most spacious souls thus far been!
Characters of blood did they write on the way they went, and their
folly taught that truth is proved by blood.
But blood is the very worst witness to truth; blood taints the purest
teaching, and turns it into delusion and hatred of heart.
And when a person goes through fire for his teaching - what does that
prove! It is more, truly, when out of one's own burning comes one's own
teaching!
Sultry heart and cold head; where these meet, there arises the blusterer,
the "Saviour."
75
Greater ones, truly, have there been, and higher-born ones, than those
whom the people call saviors, those rapturous blusterers!
And by still greater ones than any of the saviors must you be saved, my
brothers, if you would find the way to freedom!
Never yet has there been a overman. Naked have I seen both of them,
the greatest man and the smallest man:-
All-too-similar are they still to each other. Truly, even the greatest
found I - all-too-human! -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 2, (5)
THE VIRTUOUS
WITH thunder and heavenly fireworks must one speak to indolent and
somnolent senses.
But beauty's voice speaks gently: it appeals only to the most awakened
souls.
Gently vibrated and laughed to me to-day my buckler; it was beauty's
holy laughing and thrilling.
At you, you virtuous ones, laughed my beauty to-day. And thus came
its voice to me: "They want - to be paid besides!"
You want to be paid besides, you virtuous ones! you want reward for
virtue, and heaven for earth, and eternity for your to-day?
And now you upbraid me for teaching that there is no reward-giver,
nor paymaster? And truly, I do not even teach that virtue is its own reward.
Ah! this is my sorrow: into the basis of things have reward and punishment
been insinuated - and now even into the basis of your souls, you
virtuous ones!
But like the snout of the boar shall my word grub up the basis of your
souls; a ploughshare will I be called by you.
All the secrets of your heart shall be brought to light; and when you lie
in the sun, grubbed up and broken, then will also your falsehood be separated
from your truth.
For this is your truth: you are too pure for the filth of the words: vengeance,
punishment, recompense, retribution.
76
You love your virtue as a mother loves her child; but when did one
hear of a mother wanting to be paid for her love?
It is your dearest Self, your virtue. The ring's thirst is in you: to reach itself
again struggles every ring, and turns itself.
And like the star that goes out, so is every work of your virtue: ever is
its light on its way and travelling - and when will it cease to be on its
way?
Thus is the light of your virtue still on its way, even when its work is
done. Be it forgotten and dead, still its ray of light lives and travels.
That your virtue is your Self, and not an outward thing, a skin, or a
cloak: that is the truth from the basis of your souls, you virtuous ones!-
But sure enough there are those to whom virtue means writhing under
the lash: and you have listened too much to their crying!
And others are there who call virtue the slothfulness of their vices; and
when once their hatred and jealousy relax the limbs, their "justice" becomes
lively and rubs its sleepy eyes.
And others are there who are drawn downwards: their devils draw
them. But the more they sink, the more ardently glows their eye, and the
longing for their God.
Ah! their crying also has reached your ears, you virtuous ones: "What I
am not, that, that is God to me, and virtue!"
And others are there who go along heavily and creakingly, like carts
taking stones downhill: they talk much of dignity and virtue - their drag
they call virtue!
And others are there who are like eight-day clocks when wound up;
they tick, and want people to call ticking - virtue.
Truly, in those have I my amusement: wherever I find such clocks I
shall wind them up with my mockery, and they shall even whirr
thereby!
And others are proud of their modicum of righteousness, and for the
sake of it do violence to all things: so that the world is drowned in their
unrighteousness.
Ah! how ineptly comes the word "virtue" out of their mouth! And
when they say: "I am just," it always sounds like: "I am just - revenged!"
With their virtues they want to scratch out the eyes of their enemies;
and they elevate themselves only that they may lower others.
And again there are those who sit in their swamp, and speak thus from
among the bulrushes: "Virtue - that is to sit quietly in the swamp.
We bite no one, and go out of the way of him who would bite; and in
all matters we have the opinion that is given us."
77
And again there are those who love attitudes, and think that virtue is a
sort of attitude.
Their knees continually adore, and their hands are eulogies of virtue,
but their heart knows naught thereof.
And again there are those who regard it as virtue to say: "Virtue is necessary";
but after all they believe only that policemen are necessary.
And many a one who cannot see men's loftiness, calls it virtue to see
their baseness far too well: thus calls he his evil eye virtue.-
And some want to be edified and raised up, and call it virtue: and others
want to be cast down, - and likewise call it virtue.
And thus do almost all think that they participate in virtue; and at least
everyone claims to be an authority on "good" and "evil."
But Zarathustra came not to say to all those liars and fools: "What do
you know of virtue! What could you know of virtue!"-
But that you, my friends, might become weary of the old words which
you have learned from the fools and liars:
That you might become weary of the words "reward," "retribution,"
"punishment," "righteous vengeance."-
That you might become weary of saying: "That an action is good is because
it is unselfish."
Ah! my friends! That your very Self be in your action, as the mother is
in the child: let that be your formula of virtue!
Truly, I have taken from you a hundred formulae and your virtue's favorite
playthings; and now you upbraid me, as children upbraid.
They played by the sea - then came there a wave and swept their
playthings into the deep: and now do they cry.
But the same wave shall bring them new playthings, and spread before
them new speckled shells!
Thus will they be comforted; and like them shall you also, my friends,
have your comforting - and new speckled shells! -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 2, (6) THE RABBLE
LIFE is a well of delight; but where the rabble also drink, there all fountains
are poisoned.
To everything cleanly am I well disposed; but I hate to see the grinning
78
mouths and the thirst of the unclean.
They cast their eye down into the fountain: and now glances up to me
their odious smile out of the fountain.
The holy water have they poisoned with their lustfulness; and when
they called their filthy dreams delight, then poisoned they also the
words.
Indignant becomes the flame when they put their damp hearts to the
fire; the spirit itself bubbles and smokes when the rabble approach the
fire.
Mawkish and over-mellow becomes the fruit in their hands: unsteady,
and withered at the top, does their look make the fruit-tree.
And many a one who has turned away from life, has only turned away
from the rabble: he hated to share with them fountain, flame, and fruit.
And many a one who has gone into the wilderness and suffered thirst
with beasts of prey, disliked only to sit at the cistern with filthy cameldrivers.
And many a one who has come along as a destroyer, and as a hailstorm
to all cornfields, wanted merely to put his foot into the jaws of the rabble,
and thus stop their throat.
And it is not the mouthful which has most choked me, to know that life
itself requires enmity and death and torture-crosses:-
But I asked once, and suffocated almost with my question: What? Is the
rabble also necessary for life?
Are poisoned fountains necessary, and stinking fires, and filthy
dreams, and maggots in the bread of life?
Not my hatred, but my loathing, gnawed hungrily at my life! Ah, often
became I weary of spirit, when I found even the rabble spiritual!
And on the rulers turned I my back, when I saw what they now call
ruling: to traffic and bargain for power - with the rabble!
Among peoples of a strange language did I dwell, with stopped ears:
so that the language of their trafficking might remain strange to me, and
their bargaining for power.
And holding my nose, I went morosely through all yesterdays and
todays: truly, badly smell all yesterdays and todays of the scribbling
rabble!
Like a cripple become deaf, and blind, and dumb - thus have I lived
long; that I might not live with the power-rabble, the scribe-rabble, and
the pleasure-rabble.
Toilsomely did my spirit mount stairs, and cautiously; alms of delight
were its refreshment; on the staff did life creep along with the blind one.
79
What has happened to me? How have I freed myself from loathing?
Who has rejuvenated my eye? How have I flown to the height where no
rabble any longer sit at the wells?
Did my loathing itself create for me wings and fountain-divining
powers? Truly, to the loftiest height had I to fly, to find again the well of
delight!
Oh, I have found it, my brothers! Here on the loftiest height bubbles up
for me the well of delight! And there is a life at whose waters none of the
rabble drink with me!
Almost too violently do you flow for me, you fountain of delight! And
often emptiest you the goblet again, in wanting to fill it!
And yet must I learn to approach you more modestly: far too violently
does my heart still flow towards you:-
My heart on which my summer burns, my short, hot, melancholy,
over-happy summer: how my summer heart longs for your coolness!
Past, the lingering distress of my spring! Past, the wickedness of my
snowflakes in June! Summer have I become entirely, and summer-noontide!
A summer on the loftiest height, with cold fountains and blissful stillness:
oh, come, my friends, that the stillness may become more blissful!
For this is our height and our home: too high and steep do we here
dwell for all uncleanly ones and their thirst.
Cast but your pure eyes into the well of my delight, my friends! How
could it become turbid thereby! It shall laugh back to you with its purity.
On the tree of the future build we our nest; eagles shall bring us lone
ones food in their beaks!
Truly, no food of which the impure could be fellow-partakers! Fire,
would they think they devoured, and burn their mouths!
Truly, no abodes do we here keep ready for the impure! An ice-cave to
their bodies would our happiness be, and to their spirits!
And as strong winds will we live above them, neighbor to the eagles,
neighbor to the snow, neighbor to the sun: thus live the strong winds.
And like a wind will I one day blow among them, and with my spirit,
take the breath from their spirit: thus wills my future.
Truly, a strong wind is Zarathustra to all low places; and this counsel
counsels he to his enemies, and to whatever spits and spews: "Take care
not to spit against the wind!" -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
80
Part 2, (7) THE TARANTULAS
BEHOLD, THIS is the tarantula's den! would you see the tarantula itself?
Here hangs its web: touch this, so that it may tremble.
There comes the tarantula willingly: Welcome, tarantula! Black on your
back is your triangle and symbol; and I know also what is in your soul.
Revenge is in your soul: wherever you bite, there arises black scab;
with revenge, your poison makes the soul giddy!
Thus do I speak to you in parable, you who make the soul giddy, you
preachers of equality! Tarantulas are you to me, and secretly revengeful
ones!
But I will soon bring your hiding-places to the light: therefore do I
laugh in your face my laughter of the height.
Therefore do I tear at your web, that your rage may lure you out of
your den of lies, and that your revenge may leap forth from behind your
word "justice."
Because, for man to be redeemed from revenge - that is for me the
bridge to the highest hope, and a rainbow after long storms.
Otherwise, however, would the tarantulas have it. "Let it be very
justice for the world to become full of the storms of our vengeance" -
thus do they talk to one another.
"Vengeance will we use, and insult, against all who are not like us" -
thus do the tarantula-hearts pledge themselves.
"And 'Will to Equality' - that itself shall henceforth be the name of virtue;
and against all that has power will we raise an outcry!"
You preachers of equality, the tyrant-frenzy of impotence cries thus in
you for "equality": your most secret tyrant-longings disguise themselves
thus in virtue-words!
Fretted conceit and suppressed envy - perhaps your fathers' conceit
and envy: in you break they forth as flame and frenzy of vengeance.
What the father has hid comes out in the son; and oft have I found in
the son the father's revealed secret.
Inspired ones they resemble: but it is not the heart that inspires them -
but vengeance. And when they become subtle and cold, it is not spirit,
but envy, that makes them so.
Their jealousy leads them also into thinkers' paths; and this is the sign
of their jealousy - they always go too far: so that their fatigue has at last
to go to sleep on the snow.
81
In all their lamentations sounds vengeance, in all their eulogies is maleficence;
and being judge seems to them bliss.
But thus do I counsel you, my friends: distrust all in whom the impulse
to punish is powerful!
They are people of bad race and lineage; out of their countenances peer
the hangman and the sleuth-hound.
Distrust all those who talk much of their justice! Truly, in their souls
not only honey is lacking.
And when they call themselves "the good and just," forget not, that for
them to be Pharisees, nothing is lacking but - power!
My friends, I will not be mixed up and confounded with others.
There are those who preach my doctrine of life, and are at the same
time preachers of equality, and tarantulas.
That they speak in favour of life, though they sit in their den, these
poison-spiders, and withdrawn from life - is because they would thereby
do injury.
To those would they thereby do injury who have power at present: for
with those the preaching of death is still most at home.
Were it otherwise, then would the tarantulas teach otherwise: and they
themselves were formerly the best world-maligners and heretic-burners.
With these preachers of equality will I not be mixed up and confounded.
For thus speaks justice to me: "Men are not equal."
And neither shall they become so! What would be my love to the overman,
if I spoke otherwise?
On a thousand bridges and piers shall they throng to the future, and always
shall there be more war and inequality among them: thus does my
great love make me speak!
Inventors of figures and phantoms shall they be in their hostilities; and
with those figures and phantoms shall they yet fight with each other the
supreme fight!
Good and evil, and rich and poor, and high and low, and all names of
values: weapons shall they be, and sounding signs, that life must again
and again surpass itself!
Aloft will it build itself with columns and stairs - life itself into remote
distances would it gaze, and out towards blissful beauties - therefore
does it require elevation!
And because it requires elevation, therefore does it require steps, and
variance of steps and climbers! To rise strives life, and in rising to surpass
itself.
And just behold, my friends! Here where the tarantula's den is, rises
82
aloft an ancient temple's ruins - just behold it with enlightened eyes!
Truly, he who here towered aloft his thoughts in stone, knew as well as
the wisest ones about the secret of life!
That there is struggle and inequality even in beauty, and war for power
and supremacy: that does he here teach us in the plainest parable.
How divinely do vault and arch here contrast in the struggle: how with
light and shade they strive against each other, the divinely striving ones.-
Thus, steadfast and beautiful, let us also be enemies, my friends! Divinely
will we strive against one another!-
Alas. There has the tarantula bit me myself, my old enemy! Divinely
steadfast and beautiful, it has bit me on the finger!
"Punishment must there be, and justice" - so thinks it: "not gratuitously
shall he here sing songs in honor of enmity!"
Yes, it has revenged itself! And Alas. now will it make my soul also
dizzy with revenge!
That I may not turn dizzy, however, bind me fast, my friends, to this
pillar! Rather will I be a pillar-saint than a whirl of vengeance!
Truly, no cyclone or whirlwind is Zarathustra: and if he be a dancer, he
is not at all a tarantula-dancer! -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 2, (8) THE FAMOUS WISE ONES
THE people have you served and the people's superstition - not the
truth! - all you famous wise ones! And just on that account did they pay
you reverence.
And on that account also did they tolerate your unbelief, because it
was a pleasantry and a by-path for the people. Thus does the master give
free scope to his slaves, and even enjoys their presumptuousness.
But he who is hated by the people, as the wolf by the dogs - is the free
spirit, the enemy of fetters, the non-adorer, the dweller in the woods.
To hunt him out of his lair - that was always called "sense of right" by
the people: on him do they still hound their sharpest-toothed dogs.
"For there the truth is, where the people are! Woe, woe to the seeking
ones!" - thus has it echoed through all time.
Your people would you justify in their reverence: that called you "Will
to Truth," you famous wise ones!
83
And your heart has always said to itself: "From the people have I come:
from thence came to me also the voice of God."
Stiff-necked and artful, like the ass, have you always been, as the advocates
of the people.
And many a powerful one who wanted to run well with the people,
has harnessed in front of his horses - a donkey, a famous wise man.
And now, you famous wise ones, I would have you finally throw off
entirely the skin of the lion!
The skin of the beast of prey, the speckled skin, and the disheveled
locks of the investigator, the searcher, and the conqueror!
Ah! for me to learn to believe in your "conscientiousness," you would
first have to break your venerating will.
Conscientious - so call I him who goes into God-forsaken wildernesses,
and has broken his venerating heart.
In the yellow sands and burnt by the sun, he doubtless peers thirstily at
the isles rich in fountains, where life reposes under shady trees.
But his thirst does not persuade him to become like those comfortable
ones: for where there are oases, there are also idols.
Hungry, fierce, lonesome, God-forsaken: so does the lion-will wish itself.
Free from the happiness of slaves, redeemed from deities and adorations,
fearless and fear-inspiring, grand and lonesome: so is the will of
the conscientious.
In the wilderness have ever dwelt the conscientious, the free spirits, as
lords of the wilderness; but in the cities dwell the well-foddered, famous
wise ones - the draught-beasts.
For, always do they draw, as asses - the people's carts!
Not that I on that account upbraid them: but serving ones do they remain,
and harnessed ones, even though they glitter in golden harness.
And often have they been good servants and worthy of their hire. For
thus says virtue: "If you must be a servant, seek him to whom your service
is most useful!
The spirit and virtue of your master shall advance by you being his servant:
thus will you yourself advance with his spirit and virtue!"
And truly, you famous wise ones, you servants of the people! you
yourselves have advanced with the people's spirit and virtue - and the
people by you! To your honor do I say it!
But the people you remain for me, even with your virtues, the people
with purblind eyes - the people who know not what spirit is!
Spirit is life which itself cuts into life: by its own torture does it increase
84
its own knowledge, - did you know that before?
And the spirit's happiness is this: to be anointed and consecrated with
tears as a sacrificial victim, - did you know that before?
And the blindness of the blind one, and his seeking and groping, shall
yet testify to the power of the sun into which he has gazed, - did you
know that before?
And with mountains shall the discerning one learn to build! It is a
small thing for the spirit to remove mountains, - did you know that before?
You know only the sparks of the spirit: but you do not see the anvil
which it is, and the cruelty of its hammer!
Truly, you know not the spirit's pride! But still less could you endure
the spirit's humility, should it ever want to speak!
And never yet could you cast your spirit into a pit of snow: you are not
hot enough for that! Thus are you unaware, also, of the delight of its
coldness.
In all respects, however, you make too familiar with the spirit; and out
of wisdom have you often made an alms-house and a hospital for bad
poets.
You are not eagles: thus have you never experienced the happiness of
the alarm of the spirit. And he who is not a bird should not camp above
abysses.
You seem to me lukewarm ones: but coldly flows all deep knowledge.
Ice-cold are the innermost wells of the spirit: a refreshment to hot hands
and handlers.
Respectable do you there stand, and stiff, and with straight backs, you
famous wise ones! - no strong wind or will impels you.
Have you never seen a sail crossing the sea, rounded and inflated, and
trembling with the violence of the wind?
Like the sail trembling with the violence of the spirit, does my wisdom
cross the sea - my wild wisdom!
But you servants of the people, you famous wise ones - how could you
go with me!-
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 2, (9) THE NIGHT-SONG
85
'TIS night: now do all gushing fountains speak louder. And my soul
also is a gushing fountain.
'Tis night: now only do all songs of the loving ones awake. And my
soul also is the song of a loving one.
Something unappeased, unappeasable, is within me; it longs to find expression.
A craving for love is within me, which speaks itself the language
of love.
Light am I: ah, that I were night! But it is my lonesomeness to be girt
with light!
Ah, that I were dark and nightly! How would I suck at the breasts of
light!
And you yourselves would I bless, you twinkling starlets and glowworms
aloft! - and would rejoice in the gifts of your light.
But I live in my own light, I drink again into myself the flames that
break forth from me.
I know not the happiness of the receiver; and oft have I dreamt that
stealing must be more blessed than receiving.
It is my poverty that my hand never ceases bestowing; it is my envy
that I see waiting eyes and the brightened nights of longing.
Oh, the misery of all bestowers! Oh, the darkening of my sun! Oh, the
craving to crave! Oh, the violent hunger in satiety!
They take from me: but do I yet touch their soul? There is a gap
between giving and receiving; and the smallest gap has finally to be
bridged over.
A hunger arises out of my beauty: I should like to injure those I illumine;
I should like to rob those I have gifted: - thus do I hunger for
wickedness.
Withdrawing my hand when another hand already stretches out to it;
hesitating like the cascade, which hesitates even in its leap: - thus do I
hunger for wickedness!
Such revenge does my abundance think of such mischief wells out of
my lonesomeness.
My happiness in bestowing died in bestowing; my virtue became
weary of itself by its abundance!
He who ever bestows is in danger of losing his shame; to him who ever
dispenses, the hand and heart become callous by very dispensing.
My eye no longer overflows for the shame of suppliants; my hand has
become too hard for the trembling of filled hands.
Whence have gone the tears of my eye, and the down of my heart? Oh,
the lonesomeness of all bestowers! Oh, the silence of all shining ones!
86
Many suns circle in desert space: to all that is dark do they speak with
their light - but to me they are silent.
Oh, this is the hostility of light to the shining one: unpityingly does it
pursue its course.
Unfair to the shining one in its innermost heart, cold to the suns: - thus
travels every sun.
Like a storm do the suns pursue their courses: that is their travelling.
Their inexorable will do they follow: that is their coldness.
Oh, you only is it, you dark, nightly ones, that extract warmth from the
shining ones! Oh, you only drink milk and refreshment from the light's
udders!
Ah, there is ice around me; my hand burns with the iciness! Ah, there is
thirst in me; it pants after your thirst!
'Tis night: alas, that I have to be light! And thirst for the nightly! And
lonesomeness!
'Tis night: now does my longing break forth in me as a fountain, - for
speech do I long.
'Tis night: now do all gushing fountains speak louder. And my soul
also is a gushing fountain.
'Tis night: now do all songs of loving ones awake. And my soul also is
the song of a loving one. -
Thus sang Zarathustra.
Part 2, (10) THE DANCE-SONG
ONE evening went Zarathustra and his disciples through the forest;
and when he sought for a well, behold, he lighted upon a green meadow
peacefully surrounded by trees and bushes, where maidens were dancing
together. As soon as the maidens recognized Zarathustra, they
ceased dancing; Zarathustra, however, approached them with friendly
mien and spoke these words:
Cease not your dancing, you lovely maidens! No game-spoiler has
come to you with evil eye, no enemy of maidens.
God's advocate am I with the devil: he, however, is the spirit of gravity.
How could I, you light-footed ones, be hostile to divine dances? Or to
maidens' feet with fine ankles?
To be sure, I am a forest, and a night of dark trees: but he who is not
87
afraid of my darkness, will find banks full of roses under my cypresses.
And even the little God may he find, who is dearest to maidens: beside
the well lies he quietly, with closed eyes.
Truly, in broad daylight did he fall asleep, the sluggard! Had he perhaps
chased butterflies too much?
Upbraid me not, you beautiful dancers, when I chasten the little God
somewhat! He will cry, certainly, and weep - but he is laughable even
when weeping!
And with tears in his eyes shall he ask you for a dance; and I myself
will sing a song to his dance:
A dance-song and satire on the spirit of gravity my supreme, most
powerful devil, who is said to be "lord of the world."-
And this is the song that Zarathustra sang when Cupid and the maidens
danced together:
Of late did I gaze into your eye, O Life! And into the unfathomable did
I there seem to sink.
But you pulled me out with a golden angle; derisively did you laugh
when I called you unfathomable.
"Such is the language of all fish," said you; "what they do not fathom is
unfathomable.
But changeable am I only, and wild, and altogether a woman, and no
virtuous one:
Though I be called by you men the 'profound one,' or the 'faithful one,'
'the eternal one,' 'the mysterious one.'
But you men endow us always with your own virtues - alas, you virtuous
ones!"
Thus did she laugh, the unbelievable one; but never do I believe her
and her laughter, when she speaks evil of herself.
And when I talked face to face with my wild Wisdom, she said to me
angrily: "you will, you crave, you love; on that account alone do you
praise Life!"
Then had I almost answered indignantly and told the truth to the
angry one; and one cannot answer more indignantly than when one
"tells the truth" to one's Wisdom.
For thus do things stand with us three. In my heart do I love only Life -
and truly, most when I hate her!
But that I am fond of Wisdom, and often too fond, is because she reminds
me very strongly of Life!
She has her eye, her laugh, and even her golden angle-rod: am I responsible
for it that both are so alike?
88
And when once Life asked me: "Who is she then, this Wisdom?" - then
said I eagerly: "Ah, yes! Wisdom!
One thirsts for her and is not satisfied, one looks through veils, one
grasps through nets.
Is she beautiful? What do I know! But the oldest carps are still lured by
her.
Changeable is she, and wayward; often have I seen her bite her lip, and
pass the comb against the grain of her hair.
Perhaps she is wicked and false, and altogether a woman; but when
she speaks ill of herself, just then does she seduce most."
When I had said this to Life, then laughed she maliciously, and shut
her eyes. "Of whom do you speak?" said she. "Perhaps of me?
And if you were right - is it proper to say that in such wise to my face!
But now, pray, speak also of your Wisdom!"
Ah, and now have you again opened your eyes, O beloved Life! And
into the unfathomable have I again seemed to sink. -
Thus sang Zarathustra. But when the dance was over and the maidens
had departed, he became sad.
"The sun has been long set," said he at last, "the meadow is damp, and
from the forest comes coolness.
An unknown presence is about me, and gazes thoughtfully. What! you
live still, Zarathustra?
Why? Wherefore? Whereby? where? Where? How? Is it not folly still to
live?-
Ah, my friends; the evening is it which thus interrogates in me. Forgive
me my sadness!
Evening has come on: forgive me that evening has come on!"
Thus sang Zarathustra.
Part 2, (11) THE GRAVE-SONG
"YONDER is the grave-island, the silent isle; yonder also are the graves
of my youth. There will I carry an evergreen wreath of life."
Resolving thus in my heart, did I sail over the sea.-
Oh, you sights and scenes of my youth! Oh, all you gleams of love, you
divine fleeting gleams! How could you perish so soon for me! I think of
you to-day as my dead ones.
89
From you, my dearest dead ones, comes to me a sweet savor, heartopening
and melting. Truly, it convulses and opens the heart of the lone
seafarer.
Still am I the richest and most to be envied - I, the most lonesome one!
For I have possessed you, and you possess me still. Tell me: to whom has
there ever fallen such rosy apples from the tree as have fallen to me?
Still am I your love's heir and heritage, blooming to your memory with
many-hued, wild-growing virtues, O you dearest ones!
Ah, we were made to remain close to each other, you kindly strange
marvels; and not like timid birds did you come to me and my longing -
no, but as trusting ones to a trusting one!
Yes, made for faithfulness, like me, and for fond eternities, must I now
name you by your faithlessness, you divine glances and fleeting gleams:
no other name have I yet learnt.
Truly, too early did you die for me, you fugitives. Yet did you not flee
from me, nor did I flee from you: innocent are we to each other in our
faithlessness.
To kill me, did they strangle you, you singing birds of my hopes! Yes,
at you, you dearest ones, did malice ever shoot its arrows - to hit my
heart!
And they hit it! Because you were always my dearest, my possession
and my possessedness: on that account had you to die young, and far too
early!
At my most vulnerable point did they shoot the arrow - namely, at
you, whose skin is like down - or more like the smile that had at a
glance!
But this word will I say to my enemies: What is all manslaughter in
comparison with what you have done to me!
Worse evil did you do to me than all manslaughter; the irretrievable
did you take from me: - thus do I speak to you, my enemies!
Slew you not my youth's visions and dearest marvels! My playmates
took you from me, the blessed spirits! To their memory do I deposit this
wreath and this curse.
This curse upon you, my enemies! Have you not made my eternal
short, as a tone had away in a cold night! Scarcely, as the twinkle of divine
eyes, did it come to me - as a fleeting gleam!
Thus spoke once in a happy hour my purity: "Divine shall everything
be to me."
Then did you haunt me with foul phantoms; ah, where has that happy
hour now fled!
90
"All days shall be holy to me" - so spoke once the wisdom of my youth:
truly, the language of a joyous wisdom!
But then did you enemies steal my nights, and sold them to sleepless
torture: ah, where has that joyous wisdom now fled?
Once did I long for happy auspices: then did you lead an owl-monster
across my path, an adverse sign. Ah, where did my tender longing then
flee?
All loathing did I once vow to renounce: then did you change my close
ones and nearest ones into ulcerations. Ah, where did my noblest vow
then flee?
As a blind one did I once walk in blessed ways: then did you cast filth
on the blind one's course: and now is he disgusted with the old footpath.
And when I performed my hardest task, and celebrated the triumph of
my victories, then did you make those who loved me call out that I then
grieved them most.
Truly, it was always your doing: you embittered to me my best honey,
and the diligence of my best bees.
To my charity have you ever sent the most impudent beggars; around
my sympathy have you ever crowded the incurably shameless. Thus
have you wounded the faith of my virtue.
And when I offered my holiest as a sacrifice, immediately did your
"piety" put its fatter gifts beside it: so that my holiest suffocated in the
fumes of your fat.
And once did I want to dance as I had never yet danced: beyond all
heavens did I want to dance. Then did you seduce my favorite minstrel.
And now has he struck up an awful, melancholy air; alas, he tooted as
a mournful horn to my ear!
Murderous minstrel, instrument of evil, most innocent instrument!
Already did I stand prepared for the best dance: then did you slay my
rapture with your tones!
Only in the dance do I know how to speak the parable of the highest
things: - and now has my grandest parable remained unspoken in my
limbs!
Unspoken and unrealized has my highest hope remained! And there
have perished for me all the visions and consolations of my youth!
How did I ever bear it? How did I survive and surmount such
wounds? How did my soul rise again out of those sepulchers?
Yes, something invulnerable, unburiable is with me, something that
would rend rocks asunder: it is called my Will. Silently does it proceed,
and unchanged throughout the years.
91
Its course will it go upon my feet, my old Will; hard of heart is its
nature and invulnerable.
Invulnerable am I only in my heel. Ever live you there, and are like
yourself, you most patient one! Ever have you burst all shackles of the
tomb!
In you still lives also the unrealisedness of my youth; and as life and
youth sit you here hopeful on the yellow ruins of graves.
Yes, you are still for me the demolisher of all graves: Hail to you, my
Will! And only where there are graves are there resurrections. -
Thus sang Zarathustra.
Part 2, (12) SELF-SURPASSING
"WILL to Truth" do you call it, you wisest ones, that which impells you
and makes you ardent?
Will for the thinkableness of all being: thus do I call your will!
All being would you make thinkable: for you doubt with good reason
whether it be already thinkable.
But it shall accommodate and bend itself to you! So wills your will.
Smooth shall it become and subject to the spirit, as its mirror and reflection.
That is your entire will, you wisest ones, as a Will to Power; and even
when you speak of good and evil, and of estimates of value.
You would still create a world before which you can bow the knee:
such is your ultimate hope and ecstasy.
The ignorant, to be sure, the people - they are like a river on which a
boat floats along: and in the boat sit the estimates of value, solemn and
disguised.
Your will and your valuations have you put on the river of becoming;
it betrays to me an old Will to Power, what is believed by the people as
good and evil.
It was you, you wisest ones, who put such guests in this boat, and gave
them pomp and proud names - you and your ruling Will!
Onward the river now carries your boat: it must carry it. A small matter
if the rough wave foams and angrily resists its keel!
It is not the river that is your danger and the end of your good and evil,
you wisest ones: but that Will itself, the Will to Power - the unexhausted,
92
procreating life-will.
But that you may understand my gospel of good and evil, for that purpose
will I tell you my gospel of life, and of the nature of all living
things.
The living thing did I follow; I walked in the broadest and narrowest
paths to learn its nature.
With a hundred-faced mirror did I catch its glance when its mouth was
shut, so that its eye might speak to me. And its eye spoke to me.
But wherever I found living things, there heard I also the language of
obedience. All living things are obeying things.
And this heard I secondly: Whatever cannot obey itself, is commanded.
Such is the nature of living things.
This, however, is the third thing which I heard - namely, that commanding
is more difficult than obeying. And not only because the commander
bears the burden of all obeyers, and because this burden readily
crushes him:-
An attempt and a risk seemed all commanding to me; and whenever it
commands, the living thing risks itself thereby.
Yes, even when it commands itself, then also must it atone for its commanding.
Of its own law must it become the judge and avenger and victim.
How does this happen! So did I ask myself. What persuades the living
thing to obey, and command, and even be obedient in commanding?
Listen now to my word, you wisest ones! Test it seriously, whether I
have crept into the heart of life itself, and into the roots of its heart!
Wherever I found a living thing, there found I Will to Power; and even
in the will of the servant found I the will to be master.
That to the stronger the weaker shall serve - to this persuades he his
will who would be master over a still weaker one. That delight alone he
is unwilling to forego.
And as the lesser surrenders himself to the greater that he may have
delight and power over the least of all, so does even the greatest surrender
himself, and stakes - life, for the sake of power.
It is the surrender of the greatest to run risk and danger, and play dice
for death.
And where there is sacrifice and service and love-glances, there also is
the will to be master. By by-ways does the weaker then slink into the
fortress, and into the heart of the mightier one - and there steals power.
And this secret spoke Life herself to me. "Behold," said she, "I am that
which must ever surpass itself.
93
To be sure, you call it will to procreation, or impulse towards a goal, towards
the higher, remoter, more manifold: but all that is one and the
same secret.
Rather would I succumb than disown this one thing; and truly, where
there is succumbing and leaf-falling, behold, there does Life sacrifice itself
- for power!
That I have to be struggle, and becoming, and purpose, and cross-purpose
- ah, he who divines my will, divines well also on what crooked
paths it has to tread!
Whatever I create, and however much I love it, - soon must I be adverse
to it, and to my love: so wills my will.
And even you, discerning one, are only a path and footstep of my will:
truly, my Will to Power walks even on the feet of your Will to Truth!
He certainly did not hit the truth who shot at it the formula: "Will to existence":
that will - does not exist!
For what is not, cannot will; that, however, which is in existence - how
could it still strive for existence!
Only where there is life, is there also will: not, however, Will to Life,
but - so I teach you - Will to Power!
Much is reckoned higher than life itself by the living one; but out of the
very reckoning speaks - the Will to Power!"-
Thus did Life once teach me: and thereby, you wisest ones, do I solve
you the riddle of your hearts.
Truly, I say to you: good and evil which would be everlasting - it does
not exist! Of its own accord must it ever surpass itself anew.
With your values and formulae of good and evil, you exercise power,
you valuing ones: and that is your secret love, and the sparkling, trembling,
and overflowing of your souls.
But a stronger power grows out of your values, and a new surpassing:
by it breaks egg and egg-shell.
And he who has to be a creator in good and evil - truly, he has first to
be a destroyer, and break values in pieces.
Thus does the greatest evil pertain to the greatest good: that, however,
is the creating good.-
Let us speak thereof, you wisest ones, even though it be bad. To be silent
is worse; all suppressed truths become poisonous.
And let everything break up which - can break up by our truths! Many
a house is still to be built! -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
94
Part 2, (13) THE SUBLIME ONES
CALM is the bottom of my sea: who would guess that it hides droll
monsters!
Unmoved is my depth: but it sparkles with swimming enigmas and
laughter.
A sublime one saw I today, a solemn one, a penitent of the spirit: Oh,
how my soul laughed at his ugliness!
With upraised breast, and like those who draw in their breath: thus did
he stand, the sublime one, and in silence:
Overhung with ugly truths, the spoil of his hunting, and rich in torn
raiment; many thorns also hung on him - but I saw no rose.
Not yet had he learned laughing and beauty. Gloomy did this hunter
return from the forest of knowledge.
From the fight with wild beasts returned he home: but even yet a wild
beast gazes out of his seriousness - an unconquered wild beast!
As a tiger does he ever stand, on the point of springing; but I do not
like those strained souls; ungracious is my taste towards all those self-engrossed
ones.
And you tell me, friends, that there is to be no dispute about taste and
tasting? But all life is a dispute about taste and tasting!
Taste: that is weight at the same time, and scales and weigher; and alas
for every living thing that would live without dispute about weight and
scales and weigher!
Should he become weary of his sublimeness, this sublime one, then
only will his beauty begin - and then only will I taste him and find him
savoury.
And only when he turns away from himself will he overleap his own
shadow - and truly! into his sun.
Far too long did he sit in the shade; the cheeks of the penitent of the
spirit became pale; he almost starved on his expectations.
Contempt is still in his eye, and loathing hides in his mouth. To be
sure, he now rests, but he has not yet taken rest in the sunshine.
As the ox ought he to do; and his happiness should smell of the earth,
and not of contempt for the earth.
As a white ox would I like to see him, which, snorting and lowing,
95
walks before the plough-share: and his lowing should also laud all that is
earthly!
Dark is still his countenance; the shadow of his hand dances upon it.
Overshadowed is still the sense of his eye.
His deed itself is still the shadow upon him: his doing obscures the
doer. Not yet has he overcome his deed.
To be sure, I love in him the shoulders of the ox: but now do I want to
see also the eye of the angel.
Also his hero-will has he still to unlearn: an exalted one shall he be, and
not only a sublime one: - the ether itself should raise him, the will-less
one!
He has subdued monsters, he has solved enigmas. But he should also
redeem his monsters and enigmas; into heavenly children should he
transform them.
As yet has his knowledge not learned to smile, and to be without jealousy;
as yet has his gushing passion not become calm in beauty.
Truly, not in satiety shall his longing cease and disappear, but in
beauty! Gracefulness belongs to the munificence of the magnanimous.
His arm across his head: thus should the hero repose; thus should he
also surmount his repose.
But precisely to the hero is beauty the hardest thing of all. Unattainable
is beauty by all ardent wills.
A little more, a little less: precisely this is much here, it is the most here.
To stand with relaxed muscles and with unharnessed will: that is the
hardest for all of you, you sublime ones!
When power becomes gracious and descends into the visible - I call
such condescension, beauty.
And from no one do I want beauty so much as from you, you powerful
one: let your goodness be your last self-conquest.
All evil do I accredit to you: therefore do I desire of you the good.
Truly, I have often laughed at the weaklings, who think themselves
good because they have crippled paws!
The virtue of the pillar shall you strive after: more beautiful does it
ever become, and more graceful - but internally harder and more sustaining
- the higher it rises.
Yes, you sublime one, one day shall you also be beautiful, and hold up
the mirror to your own beauty.
Then will your soul thrill with divine desires; and there will be adoration
even in your vanity!
For this is the secret of the soul: when the hero has abandoned it, then
96
only approaches it in dreams - the super-hero. -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 2, (14) THE LAND OF CULTURE
TOO far did I fly into the future: a horror seized upon me.
And when I looked around me, Behold. there time was my sole contemporary.
Then did I fly backwards, homewards - and always faster. Thus did I
come to you: you present-day men, and into the land of culture.
For the first time brought I an eye to see you, and good desire: truly,
with longing in my heart did I come.
But how did it turn out with me? Although so alarmed - I had yet to
laugh! Never did my eye see anything so motley-coloured!
I laughed and laughed, while my foot still trembled, and my heart as
well. "Here indeed, is the home of all the paint-pots," - said I.
With fifty patches painted on faces and limbs - so sat you there to my
astonishment, you present-day men!
And with fifty mirrors around you, which flattered your play of colours,
and repeated it!
Truly, you could wear no better masks, you present-day men, than
your own faces! Who could - recognise you!
Written all over with the characters of the past, and these characters
also pencilled over with new characters - thus have you concealed
yourselves well from all decipherers!
And though one be a trier of the reins, who still believes that you have
reins! Out of colours you seem to be baked, and out of glued scraps.
All times and peoples gaze divers-coloured out of your veils; all customs
and beliefs speak divers-coloured out of your gestures.
He who would strip you of veils and wrappers, and paints and gestures,
would just have enough left to scare the crows.
Truly, I myself am the scared crow that once saw you naked, and
without paint; and I flew away when the skeleton ogled at me.
Rather would I be a day-labourer in the underworld, and among the
shades of the by-gone! - Fatter and fuller than you, are indeed the underworldlings!
This, yes this, is bitterness to my bowels, that I can neither endure you
97
naked nor clothed, you present-day men!
All that is un-homelike in the future, and whatever makes strayed
birds shiver, is truly more homelike and familiar than your "reality."
For thus speak you: "Real are we wholly, and without faith and superstition":
thus do you plume yourselves - Alas. even without plumes!
Indeed, how would you be able to believe, you divers-coloured ones! -
you who are pictures of all that has ever been believed!
Perambulating refutations are you, of belief itself, and a dislocation of
all thought. Unbelievable ones: thus do I call you, you real ones!
All periods prate against one another in your spirits; and the dreams
and pratings of all periods were even realer than your awakeness!
Unfruitful are you: therefore do you lack belief. But he who had to create,
had always his presaging dreams and astral premonitions - and believed
in believing!-
Half-open doors are you, at which grave-diggers wait. And this is your
reality: "Everything deserves to perish."
Alas, how you stand there before me, you unfruitful ones; how lean
your ribs! And many of you surely have had knowledge thereof.
Many a one has said: "There has surely a God filched something from
me secretly whilst I slept? Truly, enough to make a girl for himself from
that!
"Amazing is the poverty of my ribs!" thus has spoken many a presentday
man.
Yes, you are laughable to me, you present-day men! And especially
when you marvel at yourselves!
And woe to me if I could not laugh at your marvelling, and had to
swallow all that is repugnant in your platters!
As it is, however, I will make lighter of you, since I have to carry what
is heavy; and what matter if beetles and May-bugs also alight on my
load!
Truly, it shall not on that account become heavier to me! And not from
you, you present-day men, shall my great weariness arise.-
Ah, where shall I now ascend with my longing! From all mountains do
I look out for fatherlands and motherlands.
But a home have I found nowhere: unsettled am I in all cities, and decamping
at all gates.
Alien to me, and a mockery, are the present-day men, to whom of late
my heart impelled me; and exiled am I from fatherlands and motherlands.
Thus do I love only my children's land, the undiscovered in the
98
remotest sea: for it do I bid my sails search and search.
to my children will I make amends for being the child of my fathers:
and to all the future - for this present-day! -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 2, (15) IMMACULATE PERCEPTION
WHEN yester-eve the moon arose, then did I fancy it about to bear a
sun: so broad and teeming did it lie on the horizon.
But it was a liar with its pregnancy; and sooner will I believe in the
man in the moon than in the woman.
To be sure, little of a man is he also, that timid night-reveller. Truly,
with a bad conscience does he stalk over the roofs.
For he is desirous and jealous, the monk in the moon; envious of the
earth, and all the joys of lovers.
No, I like him not, that tom-cat on the roofs! Hateful to me are all that
slink around half-closed windows!
Piously and silently does he stalk along on the star-carpets: - but I like
no light-treading human feet, on which not even a spur jingles.
Every honest one's step speaks; the cat however, steals along over the
ground. Behold. cat-like does the moon come along, and dishonestly.-
This parable speak I to you sentimental dissemblers, to you, the "pure
discerners!" You do I call - envious ones!
Also you love the earth, and the earthly: I have divined you well! - but
shame is in your love, and a bad conscience - you are like the moon!
To despise the earthly has your spirit been persuaded, but not your
bowels: these, however, are the strongest in you!
And now is your spirit ashamed to be at the service of your bowels,
and goes in by-ways and lying ways to escape its own shame.
"That would be the highest thing for me" - so says your lying spirit to
itself - "to gaze upon life without desire, and not like the dog, with
hanging-out tongue:
To be happy in gazing: with dead will, free from the grip and greed of
selfishness - cold and ashy-grey all over, but with intoxicated moon-eyes!
That would be the dearest thing to me" - thus does the seduced one seduce
himself, - "to love the earth as the moon loves it, and with the eye
only to feel its beauty.
99
And this do I call immaculate perception of all things: to want nothing
else from them, but to be allowed to lie before them as a mirror with a
hundred facets."-
Oh, you sentimental dissemblers, you envious ones! you lack innocence
in your desire: and now do you defame desiring on that account!
Truly, not as creators, as procreators, or as jubilators do you love the
earth!
Where is innocence? Where there is will to procreation. And he who
seeks to create beyond himself, has for me the purest will.
Where is beauty? Where I must will with my whole Will; where I will
love and perish, that an image may not remain merely an image.
Loving and perishing: these have rhymed from eternity. Will to love:
that is to be ready also for death. Thus do I speak to you cowards!
But now does your emasculated ogling profess to be "contemplation!"
And that which can be examined with cowardly eyes is to be christened
"beautiful!" Oh, you violators of noble names!
But it shall be your curse, you immaculate ones, you pure discerners,
that you shall never bring forth, even though you lie broad and teeming
on the horizon!
Truly, you fill your mouth with noble words: and we are to believe that
your heart overflows, you cozeners?
But my words are poor, contemptible, stammering words: gladly do I
pick up what falls from the table at your repasts.
Yet still can I say therewith the truth - to dissemblers! Yes, my fishbones,
shells, and prickly leaves shall - tickle the noses of dissemblers!
Bad air is always about you and your repasts: your lascivious thoughts,
your lies, and secrets are indeed in the air!
Dare only to believe in yourselves - in yourselves and in your inward
parts! He who does not believe in himself always lies.
A God's mask have you hung in front of you, you "pure ones": into a
God's mask has your execrable coiling snake crawled.
Truly you deceive, you "contemplative ones!" Even Zarathustra was
once the dupe of your godlike exterior; he did not divine the serpent's
coil with which it was stuffed.
A God's soul, I once thought I saw playing in your games, you pure
discerners! No better arts did I once dream of than your arts!
Serpents' filth and evil odour, the distance concealed from me: and that
a lizard's craft prowled thereabouts lasciviously.
But I came close to you: then came to me the day, - and now comes it to
you, - at an end is the moon's love affair!
100
See there! Surprised and pale does it stand - before the rosy dawn!
For already she comes, the glowing one, - her love to the earth comes!
Innocence, and creative desire, is all solar love!
See there, how she comes impatiently over the sea! Do you not feel the
thirst and the hot breath of her love?
At the sea would she suck, and drink its depths to her height: now rises
the desire of the sea with its thousand breasts.
Kissed and sucked would it be by the thirst of the sun; vapour would it
become, and height, and path of light, and light itself!
Truly, like the sun do I love life, and all deep seas.
And this means to me knowledge: all that is deep shall ascend - to my
height! -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 2, (16) SCHOLARS
WHEN I lay asleep, then did a sheep eat at the ivy-wreath on my head,
- it ate, and said thereby: "Zarathustra is no longer a scholar."
It said this, and went away clumsily and proudly. A child told it to me.
I like to lie here where the children play, beside the ruined wall, among
thistles and red poppies.
A scholar am I still to the children, and also to the thistles and red poppies.
Innocent are they, even in their wickedness.
But to the sheep I am no longer a scholar: so wills my lot-blessings
upon it!
For this is the truth: I have departed from the house of the scholars,
and the door have I also slammed behind me.
Too long did my soul sit hungry at their table: not like them have I got
the knack of investigating, as the knack of nut-cracking.
Freedom do I love, and the air over fresh soil; rather would I sleep on
ox-skins than on their honours and dignities.
I am too hot and scorched with my own thought: often is it ready to
take away my breath. Then have I to go into the open air, and away from
all dusty rooms.
But they sit cool in the cool shade: they want in everything to be merely
spectators, and they avoid sitting where the sun burns on the steps.
Like those who stand in the street and gape at the passers-by: thus do
101
they also wait, and gape at the thoughts which others have thought.
Should one lay hold of them, then do they raise a dust like flour-sacks,
and involuntarily: but who would divine that their dust came from corn,
and from the yellow delight of the summer fields?
When they give themselves out as wise, then do their petty sayings and
truths chill me: in their wisdom there is often an odour as if it came from
the swamp; and truly, I have even heard the frog croak in it!
Clever are they - they have dexterous fingers: what does my simplicity
pretend to beside their multiplicity! All threading and knitting and
weaving do their fingers understand: thus do they make the hose of the
spirit!
Good clockworks are they: only be careful to wind them up properly!
Then do they indicate the hour without mistake, and make a modest
noise thereby.
Like millstones do they work, and like pestles: throw only seed-corn to
them! - they know well how to grind corn small, and make white dust
out of it.
They keep a sharp eye on one another, and do not trust each other the
best. Ingenious in little artifices, they wait for those whose knowledge
walks on lame feet, - like spiders do they wait.
I saw them always prepare their poison with precaution; and always
did they put glass gloves on their fingers in doing so.
They also know how to play with false dice; and so eagerly did I find
them playing, that they perspired thereby.
We are alien to each other, and their virtues are even more repugnant
to my taste than their falsehoods and false dice.
And when I lived with them, then did I live above them. Therefore did
they take a dislike to me.
They want to hear nothing of anyone walking above their heads; and
so they put wood and earth and rubbish between me and their heads.
Thus did they deafen the sound of my tread: and least have I thus far
been heard by the most learned.
All mankind's faults and weaknesses did they put between themselves
and me: - they call it "false ceiling" in their houses.
But nevertheless I walk with my thoughts above their heads; and even
should I walk on my own errors, still would I be above them and their
heads.
For men are not equal: so speaks justice. And what I will, they may not
will! -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
102
Part 2, (17) POETS
"SINCE I have known the body better" - said Zarathustra to one of his
disciples - "the spirit has only been to me symbolically spirit; and all the
'imperishable' - that is also but a simile."
"So have I heard you say once before," answered the disciple, "and then
you added: 'But the poets lie too much.' Why didst you say that the poets
lie too much?"
"Why?" said Zarathustra. "you ask why? I do not belong to those who
may be asked after their Why.
Is my experience but of yesterday? It is long ago that I experienced the
reasons for my opinions.
Should I not have to be a cask of memory, if I also wanted to have my
reasons with me?
It is already too much for me even to retain my opinions; and many a
bird flies away.
And sometimes, also, do I find a fugitive creature in my dovecote,
which is alien to me, and trembles when I lay my hand upon it.
But what did Zarathustra once say to you? That the poets lie too much?
- But Zarathustra also is a poet.
Do you believe that he there spoke the truth? Why do you believe it?"
The disciple answered: "I believe in Zarathustra." But Zarathustra
shook his head and smiled.-
Belief does not sanctify me, said he, least of all the belief in myself.
But granting that someone did say in all seriousness that the poets lie
too much: he was right - we do lie too much.
We also know too little, and are bad learners: so we are obliged to lie.
And which of us poets has not adulterated his wine? Many a poisonous
hotchpotch has evolved in our cellars: many an indescribable thing has
there been done.
And because we know little, therefore are we pleased from the heart
with the poor in spirit, especially when they are young women!
And even of those things are we desirous, which old women tell one
another in the evening. This do we call the eternally feminine in us.
And as if there were a special secret access to knowledge, which chokes
up for those who learn anything, so do we believe in the people and in
103
their "wisdom."
This, however, do all poets believe: that whoever pricks up his ears
when lying in the grass or on lonely slopes, learns something of the
things that are between heaven and earth.
And if there come to them tender emotions, then do the poets always
think that nature herself is in love with them:
And that she steals to their ear to whisper secrets into it, and amorous
flatteries: of this do they plume and pride themselves, before all mortals!
Ah, there are so many things between heaven and earth of which only
the poets have dreamed!
And especially above the heavens: for all gods are poet-symbolisations,
poet-sophistications!
Truly, ever are we drawn aloft - that is, to the realm of the clouds: on
these do we set our gaudy puppets, and then call them gods and Supermen:-
Are not they light enough for those chairs! - all these gods and Supermen?-
Ah, how I am weary of all the inadequate that is insisted on as actual!
Ah, how I am weary of the poets!
When Zarathustra so spoke, his disciple resented it, but was silent.
And Zarathustra also was silent; and his eye directed itself inwardly, as
if it gazed into the far distance. At last he sighed and drew breath.-
I am of today and heretofore, said he thereupon; but something is in
me that is of the morrow, and the day following, and the hereafter.
I became weary of the poets, of the old and of the new: superficial are
they all to me, and shallow seas.
They did not think sufficiently into the depth; therefore their feeling
did not reach to the bottom.
Some sensation of voluptuousness and some sensation of tedium: these
have as yet been their best contemplation.
Ghost-breathing and ghost-whisking, seems to me all the jinglejangling
of their harps; what have they known thus far of the fervour of
tones!-
They are also not pure enough for me: they all muddle their water that
it may seem deep.
And rather would they thereby prove themselves reconcilers: but mediaries
and mixers are they to me, and half-and-half, and impure!-
Ah, I cast indeed my net into their sea, and meant to catch good fish;
but always did I draw up the head of some ancient God.
Thus did the sea give a stone to the hungry one. And they themselves
104
may well originate from the sea.
Certainly, one finds pearls in them: thereby they are the more like hard
molluscs. And instead of a soul, I have often found in them salt slime.
They have learned from the sea also its vanity: is not the sea the peacock
of peacocks?
Even before the ugliest of all buffaloes does it spread out its tail; never
does it tire of its lace-fan of silver and silk.
Disdainfully does the buffalo glance thereat, close to the sand with its
soul, closer still to the thicket, closest, however, to the swamp.
What is beauty and sea and peacock-splendour to it! This parable I
speak to the poets.
Truly, their spirit itself is the peacock of peacocks, and a sea of vanity!
Spectators seeks the spirit of the poet - should they even be buffaloes!-
But of this spirit became I weary; and I see the time coming when it
will become weary of itself.
Yes, changed have I seen the poets, and their glance turned towards
themselves.
Penitents of the spirit have I seen appearing; they grew out of the poets.
-
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 2, (18) GREAT EVENTS
THERE is an isle in the sea - not far from the Happy Isles of Zarathustra
- on which a volcano ever smokes; of which isle the people, and especially
the old women among them, say that it is placed as a rock before
the gate of the underworld; but that through the volcano itself the narrow
way leads downwards which conducts to this gate.
Now about the time that Zarathustra sojourned on the Happy Isles, it
happened that a ship anchored at the isle on which stands the smoking
mountain, and the crew went ashore to shoot rabbits. About the noontide
hour, however, when the captain and his men were together again,
they saw suddenly a man coming towards them through the air, and a
voice said distinctly: "It is time! It is the highest time!" But when the figure
was nearest to them (it flew past quickly, however, like a shadow, in
the direction of the volcano), then did they recognise with the greatest
surprise that it was Zarathustra; for they had all seen him before except
105
the captain himself, and they loved him as the people love: in such wise
that love and awe were combined in equal degree.
"Behold." said the old helmsman, "there goes Zarathustra to hell!"
About the same time that these sailors landed on the fire-isle, there was
a rumour that Zarathustra had disappeared; and when his friends were
asked about it, they said that he had gone on board a ship by night,
without saying where he was going.
Thus there arose some uneasiness. After three days, however, there
came the story of the ship's crew in addition to this uneasiness - and then
did all the people say that the devil had taken Zarathustra. His disciples
laughed, sure enough, at this talk; and one of them said even: "Sooner
would I believe that Zarathustra has taken the devil." But at the bottom
of their hearts they were all full of anxiety and longing: so their joy was
great when on the fifth day Zarathustra appeared among them.
And this is the account of Zarathustra's interview with the fire-dog:
The earth, said he, has a skin; and this skin has diseases. One of these
diseases, for example, is called "man."
And another of these diseases is called "the fire-dog": concerning him
men have greatly deceived themselves, and let themselves be deceived.
To fathom this mystery did I go over the sea; and I have seen the truth
naked, truly! barefooted up to the neck.
Now do I know how it is concerning the fire-dog; and likewise concerning
all the spouting and subversive devils, of which not only old women
are afraid.
"Up with you, fire-dog, out of your depth!" cried I, "and confess how
deep that depth is! Whence comes that which you snort up?
You drink copiously at the sea: that does your embittered eloquence
betray! In sooth, for a dog of the depth, you take your nourishment too
much from the surface!
At the most, I regard you as the ventriloquist of the earth: and ever,
when I have heard subversive and spouting devils speak, I have found
them like you: embittered, mendacious, and shallow.
You understand how to roar and obscure with ashes! you are the best
braggarts, and have sufficiently learned the art of making dregs boil.
Where you are, there must always be dregs at hand, and much that is
spongy, hollow, and compressed: it wants to have freedom.
'Freedom' you all roar most eagerly: but I have unlearned the belief in
'great events,' when there is much roaring and smoke about them.
And believe me, friend Hullabaloo! The greatest events - are not our
noisiest, but our stillest hours.
106
Not around the inventors of new noise, but around the inventors of
new values, does the world revolve; inaudibly it revolves.
And just own to it! Little had ever taken place when your noise and
smoke passed away. What, if a city did become a mummy, and a statue
lay in the mud!
And this do I say also to the overthrowers of statues: It is certainly the
greatest folly to throw salt into the sea, and statues into the mud.
In the mud of your contempt lay the statue: but it is just its law, that
out of contempt, its life and living beauty grow again!
With diviner features does it now arise, seducing by its suffering; and
truly! it will yet thank you for overthrowing it, you subverters!
This counsel, however, do I counsel to kings and churches, and to all
that is weak with age or virtue - let yourselves be overthrown! That you
may again come to life, and that virtue - may come to you!-"
Thus spoke I before the fire-dog: then did he interrupt me sullenly, and
asked: "Church? What is that?"
"Church?" answered I, "that is a kind of state, and indeed the most
mendacious. But remain quiet, you dissembling dog! you surely know
your own species best!
Like yourself the state is a dissembling dog; like you does it like to
speak with smoke and roaring - to make believe, like you, that it speaks
out of the heart of things.
For it seeks by all means to be the most important creature on earth, the
state; and people think it so."
When I had said this, the fire-dog acted as if mad with envy. "What!"
cried he, "the most important creature on earth? And people think it so?"
And so much vapour and terrible voices came out of his throat, that I
thought he would choke with vexation and envy.
At last he became calmer and his panting subsided; as soon, however,
as he was quiet, I said laughingly:
"you are angry, fire-dog: so I am in the right about you!
And that I may also maintain the right, hear the story of another firedog;
he speaks actually out of the heart of the earth.
Gold does his breath exhale, and golden rain: so does his heart desire.
What are ashes and smoke and hot dregs to him!
Laughter flitts from him like a variegated cloud; adverse is he to your
gargling and spewing and grips in the bowels!
The gold, however, and the laughter - these does he take out of the
heart of the earth: for, that you may know it, - the heart of the earth is of
gold."
107
When the fire-dog heard this, he could no longer endure to listen to
me. Abashed did he draw in his tail, said "bow-wow!" in a cowed voice,
and crept down into his cave.-
Thus told Zarathustra. His disciples, however, hardly listened to him:
so great was their eagerness to tell him about the sailors, the rabbits, and
the flying man.
"What am I to think of it!" said Zarathustra. "Am I indeed a ghost?
But it may have been my shadow. you have surely heard something of
the Wanderer and his Shadow?
One thing, however, is certain: I must keep a tighter hold of it; otherwise
it will spoil my reputation."
And once more Zarathustra shook his head and wondered. "What am I
to think of it!" said he once more.
"Why did the ghost cry: 'It is time! It is the highest time!'
For what is it then - the highest time?" -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 2, (19) THE SOOTHSAYER
"-AND I saw a great sadness come over mankind. The best turned
weary of their works.
A doctrine appeared, a faith ran beside it: 'All is empty, all is alike, all
has been!'
And from all hills there re-echoed: 'All is empty, all is alike, all has
been!'
To be sure we have harvested: but why have all our fruits become rotten
and brown? What was it fell last night from the evil moon?
In vain was all our labour, poison has our wine become, the evil eye
has singed yellow our fields and hearts.
Arid have we all become; and fire falling upon us, then do we turn
dust like ashes: - yes, the fire itself have we made weary.
All our fountains have dried up, even the sea has receded. All the
ground tries to gape, but the depth will not swallow!
'Alas. where is there still a sea in which one could be drowned?' so
sounds our plaint - across shallow swamps.
Truly, even for dying have we become too weary; now do we keep
awake and live on - in sepulchres."
108
Thus did Zarathustra hear a soothsayer speak; and the foreboding
touched his heart and transformed him. Sorrowfully did he go about and
wearily; and he became like to those of whom the soothsayer had
spoken.-
Truly, said he to his disciples, a little while, and there comes the long
twilight. Alas, how shall I preserve my light through it!
That it may not smother in this sorrowfulness! To remoter worlds shall
it be a light, and also to remotest nights!
Thus did Zarathustra go about grieved in his heart, and for three days
he did not take any meat or drink: he had no rest, and lost his speech. At
last it came to pass that he fell into a deep sleep. His disciples, however,
sat around him in long night-watches, and waited anxiously to see if he
would awake, and speak again, and recover from his affliction.
And this is the discourse that Zarathustra spoke when he awoke; his
voice, however, came to his disciples as from afar:
Hear, I pray you, the dream that I dreamed, my friends, and help me to
divine its meaning!
A riddle is it still to me, this dream; the meaning is hidden in it and encaged,
and does not yet fly above it on free pinions.
All life had I renounced, so I dreamed. Night-watchman and graveguardian
had I become, aloft, in the lone mountain-fortress of Death.
There did I guard his coffins: full stood the musty vaults of those
trophies of victory. Out of glass coffins did vanquished life gaze upon
me.
The odour of dust-covered eternities did I breathe: sultry and dustcovered
lay my soul. And who could have aired his soul there!
Brightness of midnight was ever around me; lonesomeness cowered
beside her; and as a third, death-rattle stillness, the worst of my female
friends.
Keys did I carry, the rustiest of all keys; and I knew how to open with
them the most creaking of all gates.
Like a bitterly angry croaking ran the sound through the long corridors
when the leaves of the gate opened: ungraciously did this bird cry, unwillingly
was it awakened.
But more frightful even, and more heart-strangling was it, when it
again became silent and still all around, and I alone sat in that malignant
silence.
Thus did time pass with me, and slip by, if time there still was: what do
I know thereof! But at last there happened that which awoke me.
Thrice did there peal peals at the gate like thunders, thrice did the
109
vaults resound and howl again: then did I go to the gate.
Alpa! cried I, who carries his ashes to the mountain? Alpa! Alpa! who
carries his ashes to the mountain?
And I pressed the key, and pulled at the gate, and exerted myself. But
not a finger's-breadth was it yet open:
Then did a roaring wind tear the folds apart: whistling, whizzing, and
piercing, it threw to me a black coffin.
And in the roaring and whistling and whizzing, the coffin burst open,
and spouted out a thousand peals of laughter.
And a thousand caricatures of children, angels, owls, fools, and childsized
butterflies laughed and mocked, and roared at me.
Fearfully was I terrified thereby: it prostrated me. And I cried with horror
as I ne'er cried before.
But my own crying awoke me: - and I came to myself.-
Thus did Zarathustra relate his dream, and then was silent: for as yet
he knew not the interpretation thereof. But the disciple whom he loved
most arose quickly, seized Zarathustra's hand, and said:
"your life itself interprets to us this dream, O Zarathustra!
Are you not yourself the wind with shrill whistling, which bursts open
the gates of the fortress of Death?
Are you not yourself the coffin full of many-hued malices and angelcaricatures
of life?
Truly, like a thousand peals of children's laughter comes Zarathustra
into all sepulchres, laughing at those night-watchmen and grave-guardians,
and whoever else rattles with sinister keys.
With your laughter will you frighten and prostrate them: fainting and
recovering will you demonstrate your power over them.
And when the long twilight comes and the mortal weariness, even then
will you not disappear from our firmament, you advocate of life!
New stars have you made us see, and new nocturnal glories: truly,
laughter itself have you spread out over us like a many-hued canopy.
Now will children's laughter ever from coffins flow; now will a strong
wind ever come victoriously to all mortal weariness: of this you are
yourself the pledge and the prophet!
Truly, they themselves didst you dream, your enemies: that was your
sorest dream.
But as you awoke from them and came to yourself, so shall they
awaken from themselves - and come to you!
Thus spoke the disciple; and all the others then thronged around
Zarathustra, grasped him by the hands, and tried to persuade him to
110
leave his bed and his sadness, and return to them. Zarathustra, however,
sat upright on his couch, with an absent look. Like one returning from
long foreign sojourn did he look on his disciples, and examined their features;
but still he knew them not. When, however, they raised him, and
set him upon his feet, behold, all on a sudden his eye changed; he understood
everything that had happened, stroked his beard, and said with a
strong voice:
"Well! this has just its time; but see to it, my disciples, that we have a
good repast; and without delay! Thus do I mean to make amends for bad
dreams!
The soothsayer, however, shall eat and drink at my side: and truly, I
will yet show him a sea in which he can drown himself!" -
Thus spoke Zarathustra. Then did he gaze long into the face of the disciple
who had been the dream-interpreter, and shook his head.-
Part 2, (20) REDEMPTION
WHEN Zarathustra went one day over the great bridge, then did the
cripples and beggars surround him, and a hunchback spoke thus to him:
"Behold, Zarathustra! Even the people learn from you, and acquire
faith in your teaching: but for them to believe fully in you, one thing is
still needful - you must first of all convince us cripples! Here have you
now a fine selection, and truly, an opportunity with more than one forelock!
The blind can you heal, and make the lame run; and from him who
has too much behind, could you well, also, take away a little; - that, I
think, would be the right method to make the cripples believe in
Zarathustra!"
Zarathustra, however, answered thus to him who so spoke: When one
takes his hump from the hunchback, then does one take from him his
spirit - so do the people teach. And when one gives the blind man eyes,
then does he see too many bad things on the earth: so that he curses him
who healed him. He, however, who makes the lame man run, inflicts
upon him the greatest injury; for hardly can he run, when his vices run
away with him - so do the people teach concerning cripples. And why
should not Zarathustra also learn from the people, when the people learn
from Zarathustra?
It is, however, the smallest thing to me since I have been among men,
111
to see one person lacking an eye, another an ear, and a third a leg, and
that others have lost the tongue, or the nose, or the head.
I see and have seen worse things, and divers things so hideous, that I
should neither like to speak of all matters, nor even keep silent about
some of them: namely, men who lack everything, except that they have
too much of one thing - men who are nothing more than a big eye, or a
big mouth, or a big belly, or something else big, - reversed cripples, I call
such men.
And when I came out of my solitude, and for the first time passed over
this bridge, then I could not trust my eyes, but looked again and again,
and said at last: "That is an ear! An ear as big as a man!" I looked still
more attentively - and actually there did move under the ear something
that was pitiably small and poor and slim. And in truth this immense ear
was perched on a small thin stalk - the stalk, however, was a man! If one
used a magnifying glass one could even recognize an envious tiny face;
also, that a bloated little soul was dangling from the stalk. The people
told me, however, that the big ear was not only a man, but a great man, a
genius. But I never believed in the people when they spoke of great men
- and I hold to my belief that it was a reversed cripple, who had too little
of everything, and too much of one thing.
When Zarathustra had spoken thus to the hunchback, and to those of
whom the hunchback was the mouthpiece and advocate, then did he
turn to his disciples in profound dejection, and said:
Truly, my friends, I walk among men as among the fragments and
limbs of human beings!
This is the terrible thing to my eye, that I find man broken up, and
scattered about, as on a battle - and butcher-ground.
And when my eye flies from the present to the bygone, it finds ever the
same: fragments and limbs and fearful chances - but no men!
The present and the bygone upon earth - ah! my friends - that is my
most unbearable trouble; and I should not know how to live, if I were
not a seer of what is to come.
A seer, a purposer, a creator, a future itself, and a bridge to the future -
and Alas. also as it were a cripple on this bridge: all that is Zarathustra.
And you also asked yourselves often: "Who is Zarathustra to us? What
shall he be called by us?" And like me, did you give yourselves questions
for answers.
Is he a promiser? Or a fulfiller? A conqueror? Or an inheritor? A harvest?
Or a ploughshare? A physician? Or a healed one?
Is he a poet? Or a genuine one? An emancipator? Or a subjugator? A
112
good one? Or an evil one?
I walk among men as the fragments of the future: that future which I
contemplate.
And it is all my poetisation and aspiration to compose and collect into
unity what is fragment and riddle and fearful chance.
And how could I endure to be a man, if man were not also the composer,
and riddle-reader, and redeemer of chance!
To redeem what is past, and to transform every "It was" into "Thus
would I have it!" - that only do I call redemption!
Will - so is the emancipator and joy-bringer called: thus have I taught
you, my friends! But now learn this likewise: the Will itself is still a prisoner.
Willing emancipates: but what is that called which still putts the emancipator
in chains?
"It was": thus is the Will's teeth-gnashing and lonesomest tribulation
called. Impotent towards what has been done - it is a malicious spectator
of all that is past.
Not backward can the Will will; that it cannot break time and time's desire
- that is the Will's lonesomest tribulation.
Willing emancipates: what does Willing itself devise in order to get free
from its tribulation and mock at its prison?
Ah, a fool becomes every prisoner! Foolishly delivers itself also the imprisoned
Will.
That time does not run backward - that is its animosity: "That which
was": so is the stone which it cannot roll called.
And thus does it roll stones out of animosity and ill-humour, and takes
revenge on whatever does not, like it, feel rage and ill-humour.
Thus did the Will, the emancipator, become a torturer; and on all that is
capable of suffering it takes revenge, because it cannot go backward.
This, yes, this alone is revenge itself: the Will's antipathy to time, and
its "It was."
Truly, a great folly dwells in our Will; and it became a curse to all humanity,
that this folly acquired spirit!
The spirit of revenge: my friends, that has thus far been man's best contemplation;
and where there was suffering, it was claimed there was always
penalty.
"Penalty," so calls itself revenge. With a lying word it feigns a good
conscience.
And because in the willer himself there is suffering, because he cannot
will backwards - thus was Willing itself, and all life, claimed - to be
113
penalty!
And then did cloud after cloud roll over the spirit, until at last madness
preached: "Everything perishes, therefore everything deserves to perish!"
"And this itself is justice, the law of time - that he must devour his children:"
thus did madness preach.
"Morally are things ordered according to justice and penalty. Oh,
where is there deliverance from the flux of things and from the
'existence' of penalty?" Thus did madness preach.
"Can there be deliverance when there is eternal justice? Alas, unrollable
is the stone, 'It was': eternal must also be all penalties!" Thus did madness
preach.
"No deed can be annihilated: how could it be undone by the penalty!
This, this is what is eternal in the 'existence' of penalty, that existence
also must be eternally recurring deed and guilt!
Unless the Will should at last deliver itself, and Willing become non-
Willing-:" but you know, my brothers, this fabulous song of madness!
Away from those fabulous songs did I lead you when I taught you:
"The Will is a creator."
All "It was" is a fragment, a riddle, a fearful chance - until the creating
Will says to it: "But thus would I have it."-
Until the creating Will says to it: "But thus do I will it! Thus shall I will
it!"
But did it ever speak thus? And when does this take place? has the Will
been unharnessed from its own folly?
has the Will become its own deliverer and joy-bringer? has it unlearned
the spirit of revenge and all teeth-gnashing?
And who has taught it reconciliation with time, and something higher
than all reconciliation?
Something higher than all reconciliation must the Will will which is the
Will to Power-: but how does that take place? Who has taught it also to
will backwards?
-But at this point in his discourse it chanced that Zarathustra suddenly
paused, and looked like a person in the greatest alarm. With terror in his
eyes did he gaze on his disciples; his glances pierced as with arrows their
thoughts and arrear-thoughts. But after a brief space he again laughed,
and said soothingly:
"It is difficult to live among men, because silence is so difficult - especially
for a babbler." -
Thus spoke Zarathustra. The hunchback, however, had listened to the
conversation and had covered his face during the time; but when he
114
heard Zarathustra laugh, he looked up with curiosity, and said slowly:
"But why does Zarathustra speak otherwise to us than to his disciples?"
Zarathustra answered: "What is there to be wondered at! With hunchbacks
one May well speak in a hunchbacked way!"
"Very good," said the hunchback; "and with pupils one may well tell
tales out of school.
But why does Zarathustra speak otherwise to his pupils - than to himself?"-
Part 2, (21) MANLY PRUDENCE
NOT the height, it is the declivity that is terrible!
The declivity, where the gaze shoots downwards, and the hand grasps
upwards. There does the heart become giddy through its double will.
Ah, friends, do you divine also my heart's double will?
This, this is my declivity and my danger, that my gaze shoots towards
the summit, and my hand would rather clutch and lean - on the depth!
To man clings my will; with chains do I bind myself to man, because I
am pulled upwards to the overman: for there does my other will tend.
And therefore do I live blindly among men, as if I knew them not: that
my hand may not entirely lose belief in firmness.
I know not you men: this gloom and consolation is often spread
around me.
I sit at the gateway for every rogue, and ask: Who wishes to deceive
me?
This is my first manly prudence, that I allow myself to be deceived, so
as not to be on my guard against deceivers.
Ah, if I were on my guard against man, how could man be an anchor to
my ball! Too easily would I be pulled upwards and away!
This providence is over my fate, that I have to be without foresight.
And he who would not languish among men, must learn to drink out
of all glasses; and he who would keep clean among men, must know
how to wash himself even with dirty water.
And thus spoke I often to myself for consolation: "Courage! Cheer up!
old heart! An unhappiness has failed to befall you: enjoy that as your -
happiness!"
This, however, is my other manly prudence: I am more forbearing to
115
the vain than to the proud.
Is not wounded vanity the mother of all tragedies? Where, however,
pride is wounded, there grows up something better than pride.
That life may be fair to behold, its game must be well played; for that
purpose, however, it needs good actors.
Good actors have I found all the vain ones: they play, and wish people
to be fond of beholding them - all their spirit is in this wish.
They represent themselves, they invent themselves; in their neighbourhood
I like to look upon life - it curs of melancholy.
Therefore am I forbearing to the vain, because they are the physicians
of my melancholy, and keep me attached to man as to a drama.
And further, who conceives the full depth of the modesty of the vain
man! I am favourable to him, and sympathetic on account of his modesty.
From you would he learn his belief in himself; he feeds upon your
glances, he eats praise out of your hands.
Your lies does he even believe when you lie favourably about him: for
in its depths sighs his heart: "What am I?"
And if that be the true virtue which is unconscious of itself - well, the
vain man is unconscious of his modesty!-
This is, however, my third manly prudence: I am not put out of conceit
with the wicked by your timorousness.
I am happy to see the marvels the warm sun hatches: tigers and palms
and rattlesnakes.
Also among men there is a beautiful brood of the warm sun, and much
that is marvellous in the wicked.
In truth, as your wisest did not seem to me so very wise, so found I
also human wickedness below the fame of it.
And oft did I ask with a shake of the head: Why still rattle, you
rattlesnakes?
Truly, there is still a future even for evil! And the warmest south is still
undiscovered by man.
How many things are now called the worst wickedness, which are only
twelve feet broad and three months long! Some day, however, will greater
dragons come into the world.
For that the overman may not lack his dragon, the super-dragon that is
worthy of him, there must still much warm sun glow on moist virgin
forests!
Out of your wild cats must tigers have evolved, and out of your
poison-toads, crocodiles: for the good hunter shall have a good hunt!
116
And truly, you good and just! In you there is much to be laughed at,
and especially your fear of what has thus far been called "the devil!"
So alien are you in your souls to what is great, that to you the overman
would be frightful in his goodness!
And you wise and knowing ones, you would flee from the solar-glow
of the wisdom in which the overman joyfully baths his nakedness!
You highest men who have come within my ken! this is my doubt of
you, and my secret laughter: I suspect you would call my overman - a
devil!
Ah, I became tired of those highest and best ones: from their "height"
did I long to be up, out, and away to the overman!
A horror came over me when I saw those best ones naked: then there
grew for me the pinions to soar away into distant futures.
Into more distant futures, into more southern souths than ever artist
dreamed of: there, where gods are ashamed of all clothes!
But disguised do I want to see you, you neighbours and fellowmen,
and well-attired and vain and estimable, as "the good and just;"-
And disguised will I myself sit among you - that I may mistake you
and myself: for that is my last manly prudence. -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 2, (22) THE STILLEST HOUR
WHAT has happened to me, my friends? you see me troubled, driven
forth, unwillingly obedient, ready to go - alas, to go away from you!
Yes, once more must Zarathustra retire to his solitude: but unjoyously
this time does the bear go back to his cave!
What has happened to me? Who orders this? - Ah, my angry mistress
wishes it so; she spoke to me. Have I ever named her name to you?
Yesterday towards evening there spoke to me my stillest hour: that is
the name of my terrible mistress.
And thus did it happen - for everything must I tell you, that your heart
may not harden against the suddenly departing one!
Do you know the terror of him who falls asleep?-
To the very toes he is terrified, because the ground gives way under
him, and the dream begins.
This do I speak to you in parable. Yesterday at the stillest hour did the
117
ground give way under me: the dream began.
The hour-hand moved on, the timepiece of my life drew breath - never
did I hear such stillness around me, so that my heart was terrified.
Then was there spoken to me without voice: "you know it, Zarathustra?"-
And I cried in terror at this whispering, and the blood left my face: but
I was silent.
Then was there once more spoken to me without voice: "you know it,
Zarathustra, but you do not speak it!"-
And at last I answered, like one defiant: "Yes, I know it, but I will not
speak it!"
Then was there again spoken to me without voice: "you will not,
Zarathustra? Is this true? Conceal yourself not behind your defiance!"-
And I wept and trembled like a child, and said: "Ah, I would indeed,
but how can I do it! Exempt me only from this! It is beyond my power!"
Then was there again spoken to me without voice: "What matter about
yourself, Zarathustra! Speak your word, and succumb!"
And I answered: "Ah, is it my word? Who am I? I await the worthier
one; I am not worthy even to succumb by it."
Then was there again spoken to me without voice: "What matter about
yourself? you are not yet humble enough for me. Humility has the hardest
skin."-
And I answered: "What has not the skin of my humility endured! At
the foot of my height do I dwell: how high are my summits, no one has
yet told me. But well do I know my valleys."
Then was there again spoken to me without voice: "O Zarathustra, he
who has to remove mountains removes also valleys and plains."-
And I answered: "As yet has my word not removed mountains, and
what I have spoken has not reached man. I went, indeed, to men, but not
yet have I attained to them."
Then was there again spoken to me without voice: "What know you
thereof! The dew falls on the grass when the night is most silent."-
And I answered: "They mocked me when I found and walked in my
own path; and certainly did my feet then tremble.
And thus did they speak to me: you forgot the path before, now do you
also forget how to walk!"
Then was there again spoken to me without voice: "What matter about
their mockery! you are one who have unlearned to obey: now shall you
command!
Know you not who is most needed by all? He who commands great
118
things.
To execute great things is difficult: but the more difficult task is to command
great things.
This is your most unpardonable obstinacy: you have the power, and
you will not rule."-
And I answered: "I lack the lion's voice for all commanding."
Then was there again spoken to me as a whispering: "It is the stillest
words which bring the storm. Thoughts that come with doves' footsteps
guide the world.
O Zarathustra, you shall go as a shadow of that which is to come: thus
will you command, and in commanding go foremost."-
And I answered: "I am ashamed."
Then was there again spoken to me without voice: "you must yet become
a child, and be without shame.
The pride of youth is still upon you; late have you become young: but
he who would become a child must surmount even his youth."-
And I considered a long while, and trembled. At last, however, did I
say what I had said at first. "I will not."
Then did a laughing take place all around me. Alas, how that laughing
lacerated my bowels and cut into my heart!
And there was spoken to me for the last time: "O Zarathustra, your
fruits are ripe, but you are not ripe for your fruits!
So must you go again into solitude: for you shall yet become mellow."-
And again was there a laughing, and it fled: then did it become still
around me, as with a double stillness. I lay, however, on the ground, and
the sweat flowed from my limbs.
-Now have you heard all, and why I have to return into my solitude.
Nothing have I kept hidden from you, my friends.
But even this have you heard from me, who is still the most reserved of
men - and will be so!
Ah, my friends! I should have something more to say to you! I should
have something more to give to you! Why do I not give it? Am I then a
niggard?-
When, however, Zarathustra had spoken these words, the violence of
his pain, and a sense of the nearness of his departure from his friends
came over him, so that he wept aloud; and no one knew how to console
him. In the night, however, he went away alone and left his friends.
THIRD PART
"You look aloft when you long for exaltation, and I look downward because
I am exalted.
119
"Who among you can at the same time laugh and be exalted?
"He who climbs on the highest mountains, laughs at all tragic plays
and tragic realities." - ZARATHUSTRA, I., "Reading and Writing."
120
Third Part
THUS SPOKE ZARATHUSTRA
THIRD PART
1. The Wanderer
2. The Vision And The Enigma
3. Involuntary Bliss
4. Before Sunrise
5. On Virtue That Makes Small
6. On The Olive-Mount
7. On Passing-By
8. The Apostates
9. The Return Home
10. The Three Evil Things
11. The Spirit Of Gravity
12. Old And New Tables
13. The Convalescent
14. The Great Longing
15. The Second Dance-Song
16. The Seven Seals
Part 3, (1) THE WANDERER
THEN, when it was about midnight, Zarathustra went his way over the
ridge of the isle, that he might arrive early in the morning at the other
coast; because there he meant to embark. For there was a good roadstead
there, in which foreign ships also liked to anchor: those ships took many
people with them, who wished to cross over from the Happy Isles. So
when Zarathustra thus ascended the mountain, he thought on the way of
his many solitary wanderings from youth onwards, and how many
mountains and ridges and summits he had already climbed.
I am a wanderer and mountain-climber, said he to his heart. I love not
the plains, and it seems I cannot long sit still.
And whatever may still overtake me as fate and experience - a wandering
will be therein, and a mountain-climbing: in the end one experiences
only oneself.
The time is now past when accidents could befall me; and what could
now fall to my lot which would not already be my own!
121
It returns only, it comes home to me at last - my own Self, and such of
it as has been long abroad, and scattered among things and accidents.
And one thing more do I know: I stand now before my last summit,
and before that which has been longest reserved for me. Ah, my hardest
path must I ascend! Ah, I have begun my lonesomest wandering!
He, however, who is of my nature does not avoid such an hour: the
hour that says to him: Now only do you go the way to your greatness!
Summit and abyss - these are now comprised together!
You go the way to your greatness: now has it become your last refuge,
what was thus far your last danger!
You go the way to your greatness: it must now be your best courage
that there is no longer any path behind you!
You go the way to your greatness: here shall no one steal after your!
Your foot itself has effaced the path behind you, and over it stands written:
Impossibility.
And if all ladders henceforth fail you, then must you learn to mount
upon your own head: how could you mount upward otherwise?
Upon your own head, and beyond your own heart! Now must the
gentlest in you become the hardest.
He who has always much-indulged himself, sickens at last by his
much-indulgence. Praises on what makes hardy! I do not praise the land
where butter and honey - flow!
To learn to look away from oneself, is necessary in order to see many
things. - this hardiness is needed by every mountain-climber.
He, however, who is obtrusive with his eyes as a discerner, how can he
ever see more of anything than its foreground!
But you, O Zarathustra, would view the ground of everything, and its
background: thus must you mount even above yourself - up, upwards,
until you have even your stars under you!
Yes! To look down upon myself, and even upon my stars: that only
would I call my summit, that has remained for me as my last summit!-
Thus spoke Zarathustra to himself while ascending, comforting his
heart with harsh maxims: for he was sore at heart as he had never been
before. And when he had reached the top of the mountain-ridge, behold,
there lay the other sea spread out before him; and he stood still and was
long silent. The night, however, was cold at this height, and clear and
starry.
I recognise my destiny, said he at last, sadly. Well! I am ready. Now
has my last lonesomeness begun.
Ah, this sombre, sad sea, below me! Ah, this sombre nocturnal
122
vexation! Ah, fate and sea! To you must I now go down!
Before my highest mountain do I stand, and before my longest wandering:
therefore must I first go deeper down than I ever ascended:
-Deeper down into pain than I ever ascended, even into its darkest
flood! So wills my fate. Well! I am ready.
Whence come the highest mountains? so did I once ask. Then did I
learn that they come out of the sea.
That testimony is inscribed on their stones, and on the walls of their
summits. Out of the deepest must the highest come to its height. -
Thus spoke Zarathustra on the ridge of the mountain where it was
cold: when, however, he came into the vicinity of the sea, and at last
stood alone among the cliffs, then had he become weary on his way, and
more eager than ever before.
Everything as yet sleeps, said he; even the sea sleeps. Drowsily and
strangely does its eye gaze upon me.
But it breaths warmly - I feel it. And I feel also that it dreams. It tosses
about dreamily on hard pillows.
Hark! Hark! How it groans with evil recollections! Or evil expectations?
Ah, I am sad along with you, you dusky monster, and angry with myself
even for your sake.
Ah, that my hand has not strength enough! Gladly, indeed, would I
free you from evil dreams! -
And while Zarathustra thus spoke, he laughed at himself with melancholy
and bitterness. What! Zarathustra, said he, will you even sing consolation
to the sea?
Ah, you amiable fool, Zarathustra, you too-blindly confiding one! But
thus have you ever been: ever have you approached confidently all that
is terrible.
Every monster would you caress. A whiff of warm breath, a little soft
tuft on its paw: - and immediately were you ready to love and lure it.
Love is the danger of the lonesomest one, love to anything, if it only
live! Laughable, truly, is my folly and my modesty in love! -
Thus spoke Zarathustra, and laughed thereby a second time. Then,
however, he thought of his abandoned friends - and as if he had done
them a wrong with his thoughts, he upbraided himself because of his
thoughts. And forthwith it came to pass that the laugher wept - with anger
and longing wept Zarathustra bitterly.
123
Part 3, (2) THE VISION AND THE ENIGMA
1.
WHEN it got abroad among the sailors that Zarathustra was on board
the ship - for a man who came from the Happy Isles had gone on board
along with him, - there was great curiosity and expectation. But
Zarathustra kept silent for two days, and was cold and deaf with sadness;
so that he neither answered looks nor questions. On the evening of
the second day, however, he again opened his ears, though he still kept
silent: for there were many curious and dangerous things to be heard on
board the ship, which came from afar, and was to go still further.
Zarathustra, however, was fond of all those who make distant voyages,
and dislike to live without danger. And Behold. when listening, his own
tongue was at last loosened, and the ice of his heart broke. Then did he
begin to speak thus:
To you, the daring venturers and adventurers, and whoever has embarked
with cunning sails upon frightful seas,-
To you the enigma-intoxicated, the twilight-enjoyers, whose souls are
allured by flutes to every treacherous gulf:
-For you dislike to grope at a thread with cowardly hand; and where
you can divine, there do you hate to calculate-
To you only do I tell the enigma that I saw - the vision of the lonesomest
one.-
Gloomily walked I lately in corpse-coloured twilight - gloomily and
sternly, with compressed lips. Not only one sun had set for me.
A path which ascended daringly among boulders, an evil, lonesome
path, which neither herb nor shrub any longer cheered, a mountain-path,
crunched under the daring of my foot.
Mutely marching over the scornful clinking of pebbles, trampling the
stone that let it slip: thus did my foot force its way upwards.
Upwards: - in spite of the spirit that drew it downwards, towards the
abyss, the spirit of gravity, my devil and archenemy.
Upwards: - although it sat upon me, half-dwarf, half-mole; paralysed,
paralysing; dripping lead in my ear, and thoughts like drops of lead into
my brain.
"O Zarathustra," it whispered scornfully, syllable by syllable, "you
stone of wisdom! you threw yourself high, but every thrown stone must
- fall!
124
O Zarathustra, you stone of wisdom, you sling-stone, you star-destroyer!
yourself threw you so high, - but every thrown stone - must fall!
Condemned of yourself, and to your own stoning: O Zarathustra, far
indeed threw you your stone - but upon yourself will it recoil!"
Then was the dwarf silent; and it lasted long. The silence, however, oppressed
me; and to be thus in pairs, one is truly lonesomer than when
alone!
I ascended, I ascended, I dreamt, I thought, - but everything oppressed
me. A sick one did I resemble, whom bad torture wearies, and a worse
dream reawakens out of his first sleep.-
But there is something in me which I call courage: it has thus far slain
for me every dejection. This courage at last bade me stand still and say:
"Dwarf! You! Or I!"-
For courage is the best slayer, - courage which attacks: for in every attack
there is sound of triumph.
Man, however, is the most courageous animal: thereby has he overcome
every animal. With sound of triumph has he overcome every pain;
human pain, however, is the sorest pain.
Courage slays also giddiness at abysses: and where does man not stand
at abysses! Is not seeing itself - seeing abysses?
Courage is the best slayer: courage slays also fellow-suffering. Fellowsuffering,
however, is the deepest abyss: as deeply as man looks into life,
so deeply also does he look into suffering.
Courage, however, is the best slayer, courage which attacks: it slays
even death itself; for it says: "Was that life? Well! Once more!"
In such speech, however, there is much sound of triumph. He who has
ears to hear, let him hear. -
2.
"Halt, dwarf!" said I. "Either I - or you! I, however, am the stronger of
the two: - you know not my abysmal thought! It - could you not endure!"
Then happened that which made me lighter: for the dwarf sprang from
my shoulder, the prying sprite! And it squatted on a stone in front of me.
There was however a gateway just where we halted.
"Look at this gateway! Dwarf!" I continued, "it has two faces. Two
roads come together here: these has no one yet gone to the end of.
This long lane backwards: it continues for an eternity. And that long
lane forward - that is another eternity.
They are antithetical to one another, these roads; they directly abut on
one another: - and it is here, at this gateway, that they come together.
The name of the gateway is inscribed above: 'This Moment.'
125
But should one follow them further - and ever further and further on,
think you, dwarf, that these roads would be eternally antithetical?"-
"Everything straight lies," murmured the dwarf, contemptuously. "All
truth is crooked; time itself is a circle."
"you spirit of gravity!" said I wrathfully, "do not take it too lightly! Or I
shall let you squat where you squattest, Haltfoot, - and I carried you
high!"
"Observe," continued I, "This Moment! From the gateway, This Moment,
there runs a long eternal lane backwards: behind us lies an eternity.
Must not whatever can run its course of all things, have already run
along that lane? Must not whatever can happen of all things have
already happened, resulted, and gone by?
And if everything has already existed, what think you, dwarf, of This
Moment? Must not this gateway also - have already existed?
And are not all things closely bound together in such wise that This
Moment draws all coming things after it? Consequently - itself also?
For whatever can run its course of all things, also in this long lane outward
- must it once more run!-
And this slow spider which creeps in the moonlight, and this moonlight
itself, and you and I in this gateway whispering together, whispering
of eternal things - must we not all have already existed?
-And must we not return and run in that other lane out before us, that
long weird lane - must we not eternally return?"-
Thus did I speak, and always more softly: for I was afraid of my own
thoughts, and arrear-thoughts. Then, suddenly did I hear a dog howl
near me.
Had I ever heard a dog howl thus? My thoughts ran back. Yes! When I
was a child, in my most distant childhood:
-Then did I hear a dog howl thus. And saw it also, with hair bristling,
its head upwards, trembling in the stillest midnight, when even dogs believe
in ghosts:
-So that it excited my commiseration. For just then went the full moon,
silent as death, over the house; just then did it stand still, a glowing
globe - at rest on the flat roof, as if on some one's property:-
Thereby had the dog been terrified: for dogs believe in thieves and
ghosts. And when I again heard such howling, then did it excite my
commiseration once more.
Where was now the dwarf? And the gateway? And the spider? And all
the whispering? Had I dreamt? Had I awakened? between rugged rocks
126
did I suddenly stand alone, dreary in the dreariest moonlight.
But there lay a man! And there! The dog leaping, bristling, whining -
now did it see me coming - then did it howl again, then did it cry: - had I
ever heard a dog cry so for help?
And truly, what I saw, the like had I never seen. A young shepherd did
I see, writhing, choking, quivering, with distorted countenance, and with
a heavy black serpent hanging out of his mouth.
Had I ever seen so much loathing and pale horror on one countenance?
He had perhaps gone to sleep? Then had the serpent crawled into his
throat - there had it bitten itself fast.
My hand pulled at the serpent, and pulled: - in vain! I failed to pull the
serpent out of his throat. Then there cried out of me: "Bite! Bite!
Its head off! Bite!" - so cried it out of me; my horror, my hatred, my
loathing, my pity, all my good and my bad cried with one voice out of
me.-
You daring ones around me! you venturers and adventurers, and whoever
of you have embarked with cunning sails on unexplored seas! you
enigma-enjoyers!
Solve to me the enigma that I then beheld, interpret to me the vision of
the lonesomest one!
For it was a vision and a foresight: - what did I then behold in parable?
And who is it that must come some day?
Who is the shepherd into whose throat the serpent thus crawled? Who
is the man into whose throat all the heaviest and blackest will thus
crawl?
-The shepherd however bit as my cry had admonished him; he bit with
a strong bite! Far away did he spit the head of the serpent: - and sprang
up.-
No longer shepherd, no longer man - a transfigured being, a light-surrounded
being, that laughed! Never on earth laughed a man as he
laughed!
O my brothers, I heard a laughter which was no human laughter, - and
now gnaws a thirst at me, a longing that is never allayed.
My longing for that laughter gnaws at me: oh, how can I still endure to
live! And how could I endure to die at present! -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
127
Part 3, (3) INVOLUNTARY BLISS
WITH such enigmas and bitterness in his heart did Zarathustra sail
over the sea. When, however, he was four day-journeys from the Happy
Isles and from his friends, then had he surmounted all his pain: - triumphantly
and with firm foot did he again accept his fate. And then
talked Zarathustra in this wise to his exulting conscience:
Alone am I again, and like to be so, alone with the pure heaven, and
the open sea; and again is the afternoon around me.
On an afternoon did I find my friends for the first time; on an afternoon,
also, did I find them a second time: - at the hour when all light becomes
stiller.
For whatever happiness is still on its way between heaven and earth,
now seeks for lodging a luminous soul: with happiness has all light now
become stiller.
O afternoon of my life! Once did my happiness also descend to the valley
that it might seek a lodging: then did it find those open hospitable
souls.
O afternoon of my life! What did I not surrender that I might have one
thing: this living plantation of my thoughts, and this dawn of my highest
hope!
Companions did the creating one once seek, and children of his hope:
and behold, it turned out that he could not find them, except he himself
should first create them.
Thus am I in the midst of my work, to my children going, and from
them returning: for the sake of his children must Zarathustra perfect
himself.
For in one's heart one loves only one's child and one's work; and where
there is great love to oneself, then is it the sign of pregnancy: so have I
found it.
Still are my children verdant in their first spring, standing close to one
another, and shaken in common by the winds, the trees of my garden
and of my best soil.
And truly, where such trees stand beside one another, there are Happy
Isles!
But one day will I take them up, and put each by itself alone: that it
may learn lonesomeness and defiance and prudence.
Gnarled and crooked and with flexible hardness shall it then stand by
the sea, a living lighthouse of unconquerable life.
Yonder where the storms rush down into the sea, and the snout of the
128
mountain drinks water, shall each on a time have his day and night
watches, for his testing and recognition.
Recognised and tested shall each be, to see if he be of my type and lineage:
- if he be master of a long will, silent even when he speaks, and giving
in such wise that he takes in giving:-
-So that he may one day become my companion, a fellow-creator and
fellow-enjoyer with Zarathustra: - such a one as writes my will on my
tables, for the fuller perfection of all things.
And for his sake and for those like him, must I perfect myself: therefore
do I now avoid my happiness, and present myself to every misfortune -
for my final testing and recognition.
And truly, it were time that I went away; and the wanderer's shadow
and the longest tedium and the stillest hour - have all said to me: "It is
the highest time!"
The word blew to me through the keyhole and said "Come!" The door
sprang subtly open to me, and said "Go!"
But I lay enchained to my love for my children: desire spread this snare
for me - the desire for love - that I should become the prey of my children,
and lose myself in them.
Desiring - that is now for me to have lost myself. I possess you, my
children! In this possessing shall everything be assurance and nothing
desire.
But brooding lay the sun of my love upon me, in his own juice stewed
Zarathustra, - then did shadows and doubts fly past me.
For frost and winter I now longed: "Oh, that frost and winter would
again make me crack and crunch!" sighed I: - then arose icy mist out of
me.
My past burst its tomb, many pains buried alike woke up: - fully slept
had they merely, concealed in corpse-clothes.
So called everything to me in signs: "It is time!" But I - heard not, until
at last my abyss moved, and my thought bit me.
Ah, abysmal thought, which are my thought! When shall I find
strength to hear you burrowing, and no longer tremble?
To my very throat throbs my heart when I hear them burrowing! your
muteness even is like to strangle me, you abysmal mute one!
As yet have I never ventured to call you up; it has been enough that I -
have carried you about with me! As yet have I not been strong enough
for my final lion-wantonness and playfulness.
Sufficiently formidable to me has your weight ever been: but one day
shall I yet find the strength and the lion's voice which will call you up!
129
When I shall have surmounted myself therein, then will I surmount
myself also in that which is greater; and a victory shall be the seal of my
perfection!-
Meanwhile do I sail along on uncertain seas; chance flatters me,
smooth-tongued chance; forward and backward do I gaze-, still see I no
end.
As yet has the hour of my final struggle not come to me - or does it
come to me perhaps just now? Truly, with insidious beauty do sea and
life gaze upon me round about:
O afternoon of my life! O happiness before eventide! O haven upon
high seas! O peace in uncertainty! How I distrust all of you!
Truly, distrustful am I of your insidious beauty! Like the lover am I,
who distrusts too sleek smiling.
As he pushes the best-beloved before him - tender even in severity, the
jealous one-, so do I push this blissful hour before me.
Away with you, you blissful hour! With you has there come to me an
involuntary bliss! Ready for my severest pain do I here stand: - at the
wrong time have you come!
Away with you, you blissful hour! Rather harbour there - with my children!
Hasten! and bless them before eventide with my happiness!
There, already approaches eventide: the sun sinks. Away - my happiness!
-
Thus spoke Zarathustra. And he waited for his misfortune the whole
night; but he waited in vain. The night remained clear and calm, and
happiness itself came closer and closer to him. Towards morning,
however, Zarathustra laughed to his heart, and said mockingly:
"Happiness runs after me. That is because I do not run after women.
Happiness, however, is a woman."
Part 3, (4) BEFORE SUNRISE
O HEAVEN above me, you pure, you deep heaven! you abyss of light!
Gazing on you, I tremble with divine desires.
Up to your height to toss myself - that is my depth! In your purity to
hide myself - that is my innocence!
The God veils his beauty: thus hide you your stars. you speak not: thus
proclaim you your wisdom to me.
130
Mute over the raging sea have you risen for me to-day; your love and
your modesty make a revelation to my raging soul.
In that you came to me beautiful, veiled in your beauty, in that you
spoke to me mutely, obvious in your wisdom:
Oh, how could I fail to divine all the modesty of your soul! Before the
sun didst you come to me - the lonesomest one.
We have been friends from the beginning: to us are grief, gruesomeness,
and ground common; even the sun is common to us.
We do not speak to each other, because we know too much-: we keep
silent to each other, we smile our knowledge to each other.
Are you not the light of my fire? have you not the sister-soul of my insight?
Together did we learn everything; together did we learn to ascend beyond
ourselves to ourselves, and to smile uncloudedly:-
-Uncloudedly to smile down out of luminous eyes and out of miles of
distance, when under us constraint and purpose and guilt stream like
rain.
And wandered I alone, for what did my soul hunger by night and in
labyrinthine paths? And climbed I mountains, whom did I ever seek, if
not you, upon mountains?
And all my wandering and mountain-climbing: a necessity was it
merely, and a makeshift of the unhandy one: - to fly only, wants my entire
will, to fly into you!
And what have I hated more than passing clouds, and whatever taints
you? And my own hatred have I even hated, because it tainted you!
The passing clouds I detest - those stealthy cats of prey: they take from
you and me what is common to us - the vast unbounded Yes - and Amen
- saying.
These mediators and mixers we detest - the passing clouds: those halfand-
half ones, that have neither learned to bless nor to curse from the
heart.
Rather will I sit in a tub under a closed heaven, rather will I sit in the
abyss without heaven, than see you, you luminous heaven, tainted with
passing clouds!
And oft have I longed to pin them fast with the jagged gold-wires of
lightning, that I might, like the thunder, beat the drum upon their kettlebellies:-
-An angry drummer, because they rob me of your yes and Amen! - you
heaven above me, you pure, you luminous heaven! you abyss of light! -
because they rob you of my yes and Amen.
131
For rather will I have noise and thunders and tempest-blasts, than this
discreet, doubting cat-repose; and also among men do I hate most of all
the soft-treaders, and half-and-half ones, and the doubting, hesitating,
passing clouds.
And "he who cannot bless shall learn to curse!" - this clear teaching
dropt to me from the clear heaven; this star stands in my heaven even in
dark nights.
I, however, am a blesser and a Yes-sayer, if you be but around me, you
pure, you luminous heaven! you abyss of light! - into all abysses do I
then carry my beneficent Yes-saying.
A blesser have I become and a Yes-sayer: and therefore strove I long
and was a striver, that I might one day get my hands free for blessing.
This, however, is my blessing: to stand above everything as its own
heaven, its round roof, its azure bell and eternal security: and blessed is
he who thus bless!
For all things are baptized at the font of eternity, and beyond good and
evil; good and evil themselves, however, are but fugitive shadows and
damp afflictions and passing clouds.
Truly, it is a blessing and not a blasphemy when I teach that "above all
things there stands the heaven of chance, the heaven of innocence, the
heaven of hazard, the heaven of wantonness."
"Of Hazard" - that is the oldest nobility in the world; that gave I back to
all things; I emancipated them from bondage under purpose.
This freedom and celestial serenity did I put like an azure bell above all
things, when I taught that over them and through them, no "eternal Will"
- wills.
This wantonness and folly did I put in place of that Will, when I taught
that "In everything there is one thing impossible - rationality!"
A little reason, to be sure, a germ of wisdom scattered from star to star
- this leaven is mixed in all things: for the sake of folly, wisdom is mixed
in all things!
A little wisdom is indeed possible; but this blessed security have I
found in all things, that they prefer - to dance on the feet of chance.
O heaven above me! you pure, you lofty heaven! This is now your purity
to me, that there is no eternal reason-spider and reason-cobweb:-
-That you are to me a dancing-floor for divine chances, that you are to
me a table of the Gods, for divine dice and dice-players!-
But you blush? Have I spoken unspeakable things? Have I abused,
when I meant to bless you?
Or is it the shame of being two of us that makes you blush! - Do you
132
bid me go and be silent, because now - day comes?
The world is deep: - and deeper than ever the day could read. Not
everything may be uttered in presence of day. But day comes: so let us
part!
O heaven above me, you modest one! you glowing one! O you, my
happiness before sunrise! The day comes: so let us part! -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 3, (5) ON THE VIRTUE THAT MAKES SMALL
1.
WHEN Zarathustra was again on the continent, he did not go straightway
to his mountains and his cave, but made many wanderings and
questionings, and ascertained this and that; so that he said of himself
jestingly: "Behold, a river that flows back to its source in many windings!"
For he wanted to learn what had taken place among men during
the interval: whether they had become greater or smaller. And once,
when he saw a row of new houses, he marvelled, and said:
"What do these houses mean? Truly, no great soul put them up as its
simile!
Did perhaps a silly child take them out of its toy-box? Would that another
child put them again into the box!
And these rooms and chambers - can men go out and in there? They
seem to be made for silk dolls; or for dainty-eaters, who perhaps let others
eat with them."
And Zarathustra stood still and meditated. At last he said sorrowfully:
"There has everything become smaller!
Everywhere do I see lower doorways: he who is of my type can still go
through them, but - he must stoop!
Oh, when shall I arrive again at my home, where I shall no longer have
to stoop - shall no longer have to stoop before the small ones!" - And
Zarathustra sighed, and gazed into the distance.-
The same day, however, he gave his discourse on the dwarfing virtue.
2.
I pass through this people and keep my eyes open: they do not forgive
me for not envying their virtues.
They bite at me, because I say to them that for small people, small
133
virtues are necessary - and because it is hard for me to understand that
small people are necessary!
Here am I still like a cock in a strange farm-yard, at which even the
hens peck: but on that account I am not unfriendly to the hens.
I am courteous towards them, as towards all small annoyances; to be
prickly towards what is small, seems to me wisdom for hedgehogs.
They all speak of me when they sit around their fire in the evening -
they speak of me, but no one thinks - of me!
This is the new stillness which I have experienced: their noise around
me spreads a mantle over my thoughts.
They shout to one another: "What is this gloomy cloud about to do to
us? Let us see that it does not bring a plague upon us!"
And recently did a woman seize upon her child that was coming to me:
"Take the children away," cried she, "such eyes scorch children's souls."
They cough when I speak: they think coughing an objection to strong
winds - they divine nothing of the boisterousness of my happiness!
"We have not yet time for Zarathustra" - so they object; but what matter
about a time that "has no time" for Zarathustra?
And if they should altogether praise me, how could I go to sleep on
their praise? A girdle of spines is their praise to me: it scratches me even
when I take it off.
And this also did I learn among them: the praiser does as if he gave
back; in truth, however, he wants more to be given him!
Ask my foot if their lauding and luring strains please it! Truly, to such
measure and ticktack, it likes neither to dance nor to stand still.
To small virtues would they rather lure and laud me; to the ticktack of
small happiness would they rather persuade my foot.
I pass through this people and keep my eyes open; they have become
smaller, and ever become smaller: - the reason thereof is their doctrine of
happiness and virtue.
For they are moderate also in virtue, - because they want comfort. With
comfort, however, moderate virtue only is compatible.
To be sure, they also learn in their way to stride on and stride forward:
that, I call their hobbling. - Thereby they become a hindrance to all who
are in haste.
And many of them go forward, and look backwards thereby, with
stiffened necks: those do I like to run up against.
Foot and eye shall not lie, nor give the lie to each other. But there is
much lying among small people.
Some of them will, but most of them are willed. Some of them are
134
genuine, but most of them are bad actors.
There are actors without knowing it among them, and actors without
intending it-, the genuine ones are always rare, especially the genuine
actors.
Of man there is little here: therefore do their women masculinise themselves.
For only he who is man enough, will - save the woman in woman.
And this hypocrisy found I worst among them, that even those who
command feign the virtues of those who serve.
"I serve, you serve, we serve" - so chants here even the hypocrisy of the
rulers - and Alas. if the first lord be only the first servant!
Ah, even upon their hypocrisy did my eyes' curiosity alight; and well
did I divine all their fly - happiness, and their buzzing around sunny
window-panes.
So much kindness, so much weakness do I see. So much justice and
pity, so much weakness.
Round, fair, and considerate are they to one another, as grains of sand
are round, fair, and considerate to grains of sand.
Modestly to embrace a small happiness - that do they call "submission"!
and at the same time they peer modestly after a new small happiness.
In their hearts they want simply one thing most of all: that no one hurt
them. Thus do they anticipate every one's wishes and do well to every
one.
That, however, is cowardice, though it be called "virtue."-
And when they chance to speak harshly, those small people, then do I
hear therein only their hoarseness - every draught of air makes them
hoarse.
Shrewd indeed are they, their virtues have shrewd fingers. But they
lack fists: their fingers do not know how to creep behind fists.
Virtue for them is what makes modest and tame: therewith have they
made the wolf a dog, and man himself man's best domestic animal.
"We set our chair in the midst" - so says their smirking to me - "and as
far from dying gladiators as from satisfied swine."
That, however, is - mediocrity, though it be called moderation. -
3.
I pass through this people and let fall many words: but they know
neither how to take nor how to retain them.
They wonder why I came not to revile venery and vice; and truly, I
came not to warn against pickpockets either!
They wonder why I am not ready to abet and whet their wisdom: as if
they had not yet enough of wiseacres, whose voices grate on my ear like
135
slate-pencils!
And when I call out: "Curse all the cowardly devils in you, that would
rather whimper and fold the hands and adore" - then do they shout:
"Zarathustra is godless."
And especially do their teachers of submission shout this; - but precisely
in their ears do I love to cry: "Yes! I am Zarathustra, the godless!"
Those teachers of submission! Wherever there is aught puny, or sickly,
or scabby, there do they creep like lice; and only my disgust prevents me
from cracking them.
Well! This is my sermon for their ears: I am Zarathustra the godless,
who says: "Who is more godless than I, that I may enjoy his teaching?"
I am Zarathustra the godless: where do I find my equal? And all those
are my equals who give to themselves their Will, and divest themselves
of all submission.
I am Zarathustra the godless! I cook every chance in my pot. And only
when it has been quite cooked do I welcome it as my food.
And truly, many a chance came imperiously to me: but still more imperiously
did my Will speak to it, - then did it lie imploringly upon its
knees-
-Imploring that it might find home and heart with me, and saying flatteringly:
"See, O Zarathustra, how friend only comes to friend!"-
But why talk I, when no one has my ears! And so will I shout it out to
all the winds:
You ever become smaller, you small people! you crumble away, you
comfortable ones! you will yet perish-
-By your many small virtues, by your many small omissions, and by
your many small submissions!
Too tender, too yielding: so is your soil! But for a tree to become great,
it seeks to twine hard roots around hard rocks!
Also what you omit weaves at the web of all the human future; even
your naught is a cobweb, and a spider that lives on the blood of the future.
And when you take, then is it like stealing, you small virtuous ones;
but even among knaves honour says that "one shall only steal when one
cannot rob."
"It gives itself" - that is also a doctrine of submission. But I say to you,
you comfortable ones, that it takes to itself, and will ever take more and
more from you!
Ah, that you would renounce all half-willing, and would decide for
idleness as you decide for action!
136
Ah, that you understood my word: "Do ever what you will - but first be
such as can will.
Love ever your neighbour as yourselves - but first be such as love
themselves-
-Such as love with great love, such as love with great contempt!" Thus
speaks Zarathustra the godless.-
But why talk I, when no one has my ears! It is still an hour too early for
me here.
My own forerunner am I among this people, my own cockcrow in dark
lanes.
But their hour comes! And there comes also mine! Hourly do they become
smaller, poorer, unfruitfuller, - poor herbs! poor earth!
And soon shall they stand before me like dry grass and prairie, and
truly, weary of themselves - and panting for fire, more than for water!
O blessed hour of the lightning! O mystery before noontide! - Running
fires will I one day make of them, and heralds with flaming tongues:-
-Herald shall they one day with flaming tongues: It comes, it is close,
the great noontide!
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 3, (6) ON THE OLIVE-MOUNT WINTER, a bad guest, sits with me
at home; blue are my hands with his friendly hand-shaking.
I honour him, that bad guest, but gladly leave him alone. Gladly do I
run away from him; and when one runs well, then one escapes him!
With warm feet and warm thoughts do I run where the wind is calm -
to the sunny corner of my olive-mount.
There do I laugh at my stern guest, and am still fond of him; because he
clears my house of flies, and quiets many little noises.
For he suffers it not if a gnat wants to buzz, or even two of them; also
the lanes makes he lonesome, so that the moonlight is afraid there at
night.
A hard guest is he, - but I honour him, and do not worship, like the tenderlings,
the pot-bellied fire-idol.
Better even a little teeth-chattering than idol-adoration! - so wills my
nature. And especially have I a grudge against all ardent, steaming,
steamy fire-idols.
137
Him whom I love, I love better in winter than in summer; better do I
now mock at my enemies, and more heartily, when winter sits in my
house.
Heartily, truly, even when I creep into bed-: there, still laughs and
wantons my hidden happiness; even my deceptive dream laughs.
I, a - creeper? Never in my life did I creep before the powerful; and if
ever I lied, then did I lie out of love. Therefore am I glad even in my
winter-bed.
A poor bed warms me more than a rich one, for I am jealous of my
poverty. And in winter she is most faithful to me.
With a wickedness do I begin every day: I mock at the winter with a
cold bath: on that account grumbles my stern house-mate.
Also do I like to tickle him with a wax-taper, that he may finally let the
heavens emerge from ashy-grey twilight.
For especially wicked am I in the morning: at the early hour when the
pail rattles at the well, and horses neigh warmly in grey lanes:-
Impatiently do I then wait, that the clear sky may finally dawn for me,
the snow-bearded winter-sky, the hoary one, the white-head,-
-The winter-sky, the silent winter-sky, which often stifles even its sun!
Did I perhaps learn from it the long clear silence? Or did it learn it from
me? Or has each of us devised it himself?
Of all good things the origin is a thousandfold, - all good roguish
things spring into existence for joy: how could they always do so - for
once only!
A good roguish thing is also the long silence, and to look, like the
winter-sky, out of a clear, round-eyed countenance:-
-Like it to stifle one's sun, and one's inflexible solar will: truly, this art
and this winter-roguishness have I learned well!
My best-loved wickedness and art is it, that my silence has learned not
to betray itself by silence.
Clattering with diction and dice, I outwit the solemn assistants: all
those stern watchers, shall my will and purpose elude.
That no one might see down into my depth and into my ultimate will -
for that purpose did I devise the long clear silence.
Many a shrewd one did I find: he veiled his countenance and made his
water muddy, that no one might see therethrough and thereunder.
But precisely to him came the shrewder distrusters and nut-crackers:
precisely from him did they fish his best-concealed fish!
But the clear, the honest, the transparent - these are for me the wisest
silent ones: in them, so profound is the depth that even the clearest water
138
does not - betray it.-
You snow-bearded, silent, winter-sky, you round-eyed whitehead
above me! Oh, you heavenly simile of my soul and its wantonness!
And must I not conceal myself like one who has swallowed gold - lest
my soul should be ripped up?
Must I not wear stilts, that they may overlook my long legs - all those
enviers and injurers around me?
Those dingy, fire-warmed, used-up, green-tinted, ill-natured souls -
how could their envy endure my happiness!
Thus do I show them only the ice and winter of my peaks - and not that
my mountain winds all the solar girdles around it!
They hear only the whistling of my winter-storms: and know not that I
also travel over warm seas, like longing, heavy, hot south-winds.
They commiserate also my accidents and chances: - but my word says:
"Suffer the chance to come to me: innocent is it as a little child!"
How could they endure my happiness, if I did not put around it accidents,
and winter-privations, and bear-skin caps, and enmantling
snowflakes!
-If I did not myself commiserate their pity, the pity of those enviers and
injurers!
-If I did not myself sigh before them, and chatter with cold, and patiently
let myself be swathed in their pity!
This is the wise waggish-will and good-will of my soul, that it conceals
not its winters and glacial storms; it conceals not its chilblains either.
To one man, lonesomeness is the flight of the sick one; to another, it is
the flight from the sick ones.
Let them hear me chattering and sighing with winter-cold, all those
poor squinting knaves around me! With such sighing and chattering do I
flee from their heated rooms.
Let them sympathise with me and sigh with me on account of my chilblains:
"At the ice of knowledge will he yet freeze to death!" - so they
mourn.
Meanwhile do I run with warm feet hither and there on my olivemount:
in the sunny corner of my olive-mount do I sing, and mock at all
pity. -
Thus sang Zarathustra.
139
Part 3, (7) ON PASSING-BY
THUS slowly wandering through many peoples and divers cities, did
Zarathustra return by round-about roads to his mountains and his cave.
And behold, thereby came he unawares also to the gate of the great city.
Here, however, a foaming fool, with extended hands, sprang forward to
him and stood in his way. It was the same fool whom the people called
"the ape of Zarathustra:" for he had learned from him something of the
expression and modulation of language, and perhaps liked also to borrow
from the store of his wisdom. And the fool talked thus to Zarathustra:
O Zarathustra, here is the great city: here have you nothing to seek and
everything to lose.
Why would you wade through this mire? Have pity upon your foot!
Spit rather on the gate of the city, and - turn back!
Here is the hell for anchorites' thoughts: here are great thoughts
seethed alive and boiled small.
Here do all great sentiments decay: here may only rattle-boned sensations
rattle!
Smell you not already the shambles and cookshops of the spirit?
Steams not this city with the fumes of slaughtered spirit?
See you not the souls hanging like limp dirty rags? - And they make
newspapers also out of these rags!
Hear you not how spirit has here become a verbal game? Loathsome
verbal swill does it vomit forth! - And they make newspapers also out of
this verbal swill.
They hound one another, and know not where! They inflame one another,
and know not why! They tinkle with their pinchbeck, they jingle
with their gold.
They are cold, and seek warmth from distilled waters: they are inflamed,
and seek coolness from frozen spirits; they are all sick and sore
through public opinion.
All lusts and vices are here at home; but here there are also the virtuous;
there is much appointable appointed virtue:-
Much appointable virtue with scribe-fingers, and hardy sitting-flesh
and waiting-flesh, blessed with small breast-stars, and padded, haunchless
daughters.
There is here also much piety, and much faithful spittle-licking and
spittle-backing, before the God of Hosts.
"From on high," drips the star, and the gracious spittle; for the high,
140
longs every starless bosom.
The moon has its court, and the court has its moon-calves: to all,
however, that comes from the court do the mendicant people pray, and
all appointable mendicant virtues.
"I serve, you serve, we serve" - so prays all appointable virtue to the
prince: that the merited star may at last stick on the slender breast!
But the moon still revolves around all that is earthly: so revolves also
the prince around what is earthliest of all - that, however, is the gold of
the shopman.
The God of the Hosts of war is not the God of the golden bar; the
prince proposes, but the shopman - disposes!
By all that is luminous and strong and good in you, O Zarathustra! Spit
on this city of shopmen and return back!
Here flows all blood putridly and tepidly and frothily through all
veins: spit on the great city, which is the great slum where all the scum
froths together!
Spit on the city of compressed souls and slender breasts, of pointed
eyes and sticky fingers-
-On the city of the obtrusive, the brazen-faced, the pen-demagogues
and tongue-demagogues, the overheated ambitious:-
Where everything maimed, ill-famed, lustful, untrustful, over-mellow,
sickly-yellow and seditious, festers perniciously:-
-Spit on the great city and turn back! -
Here, however, did Zarathustra interrupt the foaming fool, and shut
his mouth.-
Stop this at once! called out Zarathustra, long have your speech and
your species disgusted me!
Why didst you live so long by the swamp, that you yourself had to become
a frog and a toad?
Flows there not a tainted, frothy, swamp-blood in your own veins,
when you have thus learned to croak and revile?
Why did you not go into the forest? Or why didst you not till the
ground? Is the sea not full of green islands?
I despise your contempt; and when you warned me - why didst you
not warn yourself?
Out of love alone shall my contempt and my warning bird take wing;
but not out of the swamp!-
They call you my ape, you foaming fool: but I call you my gruntingpig,
- by your grunting, you spoil even my praise of folly.
What was it that first made you grunt? Because no one sufficiently
141
flattered you: - therefore didst you seat yourself beside this filth, that you
might have cause for much grunting,-
-That you might have cause for much vengeance! For vengeance, you
vain fool, is all your foaming; I have divined you well!
But your fools'-word injures me, even when you are right! And even if
Zarathustra's word were a hundred times justified, you would ever - do
wrong with my word!
Thus spoke Zarathustra. Then did he look on the great city and sighed,
and was long silent. At last he spoke thus:
I loathe also this great city, and not only this fool. Here and there -
there is nothing to better, nothing to worsen.
Woe to this great city! - And I would that I already saw the pillar of fire
in which it will be consumed!
For such pillars of fire must precede the great noontide. But this has its
time and its own fate.-
This precept, however, give I to you, in parting, you fool: Where one
can no longer love, there should one - pass by! -
Thus spoke Zarathustra, and passed by the fool and the great city.
Part 3, (8) THE APOSTATES
1.
AH, Is everything already withered and grey which but lately stood
green and many-hued on this meadow! And how much honey of hope
did I carry hence into my beehives!
Those young hearts have already all become old - and not old even!
only weary, ordinary, comfortable: - they declare it: "We have again become
pious."
Of late did I see them run forth at early morn with valorous steps: but
the feet of their knowledge became weary, and now do they malign even
their morning valour!
Truly, many of them once lifted their legs like the dancer; to them
winked the laughter of my wisdom: - then did they bethink themselves.
Just now have I seen them bent down - to creep to the cross.
Around light and liberty did they once flutter like gnats and young poets.
A little older, a little colder: and already are they mystifiers, and
mumblers and mollycoddles.
142
Did perhaps their hearts despond, because lonesomeness had swallowed
me like a whale? Did their ear perhaps listen yearningly-long for
me in vain, and for my trumpet-notes and herald-calls?
-Ah! Ever are there but few of those whose hearts have persistent courage
and exuberance; and in such remains also the spirit patient. The rest,
however, are cowardly.
The rest: these are always the great majority, the common-place, the superfluous,
the far-too many - those all are cowardly!-
Him who is of my type, will also the experiences of my type meet on
the way: so that his first companions must be corpses and buffoons.
His second companions, however - they will call themselves his believers,
- will be a living host, with much love, much folly, much unbearded
veneration.
To those believers shall he who is of my type among men not bind his
heart; in those spring-times and many-hued meadows shall he not believe,
who knows the fickly faint-hearted human species!
Could they do otherwise, then would they also will otherwise. The
half-and-half spoil every whole. That leaves become withered, - what is
there to lament about that!
Let them go and fall away, O Zarathustra, and do not lament! Better
even to blow among them with rustling winds,-
-Blow among those leaves, O Zarathustra, that everything withered
may run away from you the faster! -
2.
"We have again become pious" - so do those apostates confess; and
some of them are still too pusillanimous thus to confess.
to them I look into the eye, - before them I say it to their face and to the
blush on their cheeks: you are those who again pray!
It is however a shame to pray! Not for all, but for you, and me, and
whoever has his conscience in his head. For you it is a shame to pray!
You know it well: the faint-hearted devil in you, which would rather
fold its arms, and place its hands in its bosom, and take it easier: - this
faint-hearted devil persuades you that "there is a God!"
Thereby, however, do you belong to the light-dreading type, to whom
light never permits repose: now must you daily thrust your head deeper
into obscurity and vapour!
And truly, you choose the hour well: for just now do the nocturnal
birds again fly abroad. The hour has come for all light-dreading people,
the vesper hour and leisure hour, when they do not - "take leisure."
I hear it and smell it: it has come - their hour for hunt and procession,
143
not indeed for a wild hunt, but for a tame, lame, snuffling, soft-treaders',
soft-prayers' hunt,-
-For a hunt after susceptible simpletons: all mouse-traps for the heart
have again been set! And whenever I lift a curtain, a night-moth rushes
out of it.
Did it perhaps squat there along with another night-moth? For everywhere
do I smell small concealed communities; and wherever there are
closets there are new devotees therein, and the atmosphere of devotees.
They sit for long evenings beside one another, and say: "Let us again
become like little children and say, 'good God!'" - ruined in mouths and
stomachs by the pious confectioners.
Or they look for long evenings at a crafty, lurking cross-spider, that
preaches prudence to the spiders themselves, and teaches that "under
crosses it is good for cobweb-spinning!"
Or they sit all day at swamps with angle-rods, and on that account
think themselves profound; but whoever fishes where there are no fish, I
do not even call him superficial!
Or they learn in godly-gay style to play the harp with a hymn-poet,
who would rather harp himself into the heart of young girls: - for he has
tired of old girls and their praises.
Or they learn to shudder with a learned semi-madcap, who waits in
darkened rooms for spirits to come to him - and the spirit runs away entirely!
Or they listen to an old roving howl - and growl-piper, who has
learned from the sad winds the sadness of sounds; now pips he as the
wind, and preaches sadness in sad strains.
And some of them have even become night-watchmen: they know now
how to blow horns, and go about at night and awaken old things which
have long fallen asleep.
Five words about old things did I hear yesternight at the garden-wall:
they came from such old, sorrowful, arid night-watchmen.
"For a father he cars not sufficiently for his children: human fathers do
this better!"-
"He is too old! He now cars no more for his children," - answered the
other night-watchman.
"has he then children? No one can prove it unless he himself prove it! I
have long wished that he would for once prove it thoroughly."
"Prove? As if he had ever proved anything! Proving is difficult to him;
he lays great stress on one's believing him."
"Ay! Ay! Belief saves him; belief in him. That is the way with old
144
people! So it is with us also!"-
-Thus spoke to each other the two old night-watchmen and lightscarers,
and tooted thereupon sorrowfully on their horns: so did it happen
yesternight at the garden-wall.
To me, however, did the heart writhe with laughter, and was like to
break; it knew not where to go, and sunk into the midriff.
Truly, it will be my death yet - to choke with laughter when I see asses
drunken, and hear night-watchmen thus doubt about God.
has the time not long since passed for all such doubts? Who may
nowadays awaken such old slumbering, light-shunning things!
With the old Deities has it long since come to an end: - and truly, a
good joyful Deity-end had they!
They did not "begloom" themselves to death - that do people fabricate!
On the contrary, they - laughed themselves to death once on a time!
That took place when the ungodliest utterance came from a God himself
- the utterance: "There is but one God! you shall have no other gods
before me!"-
-An old grim-beard of a God, a jealous one, forgot himself in such
wise:-
And all the gods then laughed, and shook upon their thrones, and exclaimed:
"Is it not just divinity that there are gods, but no God?"
He that has an ear let him hear. -
Thus talked Zarathustra in the city he loved, which is surnamed "The
Pied Cow." For from here he had but two days to travel to reach once
more his cave and his animals; his soul, however, rejoiced unceasingly
on account of the closeness of his return home.
Part 3, (9) THE RETURN HOME
O LONESOMENESS! My home, lonesomeness! Too long have I lived
wildly in wild remoteness, to return to you without tears!
Now threaten me with the finger as mothers threaten; now smile upon
me as mothers smile; now say just: "Who was it that like a whirlwind
once rushed away from me?-
-Who when departing called out: 'Too long have I sat with lonesomeness;
there have I unlearned silence!' That have you learned now -
surely?
145
O Zarathustra, everything do I know; and that you were more forsaken
among the many, you unique one, than you ever were with me!
One thing is forsakenness, another matter is lonesomeness: that have
you now learned! And that among men you will ever be wild and
strange:
-Wild and strange even when they love you: for above all they want to
be treated indulgently!
Here, however, are you at home and house with yourself; here can you
utter everything, and unbosom all motives; nothing is here ashamed of
concealed, congealed feelings.
Here do all things come caressingly to your talk and flatter you: for
they want to ride upon your back. On every simile do you here ride to
every truth.
Uprightly and openly may you here talk to all things: and truly, it
sounds as praise in their ears, for one to talk to all things - directly!
Another matter, however, is forsakenness. For, do you remember, O
Zarathustra? When your bird screamed overhead, when you stood in the
forest, irresolute, ignorant where to go, beside a corpse:-
-When you spoke: 'Let my animals lead me! More dangerous have I
found it among men than among animals:' - That was forsakenness!
And do you remember, O Zarathustra? When you sat in your isle, a
well of wine giving and granting among empty buckets, bestowing and
distributing among the thirsty:
-Until at last you alone sat thirsty among the drunken ones, and wailed
nightly: 'Is taking not more blessed than giving? And stealing yet more
blessed than taking?' - That was forsakenness!
And do you remember, O Zarathustra? When your stillest hour came
and drove you forth from yourself, when with wicked whispering it
said: 'Speak and succumb!'-
-When it disgusted you with all your waiting and silence, and discouraged
your humble courage: That was forsakenness!"-
O lonesomeness! My home, lonesomeness! How blessedly and tenderly
speaks your voice to me!
We do not question each other, we do not complain to each other; we
go together openly through open doors.
For all is open with you and clear; and even the hours run here on
lighter feet. For in the dark, time weighs heavier upon one than in the
light.
Here fly open to me all beings' words and word-cabinets: here all being
wants to become words, here all becoming wants to learn of me how to
146
talk.
Down there, however - all talking is in vain! There, forgetting and
passing-by are the best wisdom: that have I learned now!
He who would understand everything in man must handle everything.
But for that I have too clean hands.
I do not like even to inhale their breath; Alas. that I have lived so long
among their noise and bad breaths!
O blessed stillness around me! O pure odours around me! How from a
deep breast this stillness fetches pure breath! How it hearkens, this
blessed stillness!
But down there - there speaks everything, there is everything misheard.
If one announce one's wisdom with bells, the shopmen in the
market-place will out-jingle it with pennies!
Everything among them talks; no one knows any longer how to understand.
Everything falls into the water; nothing falls any longer into deep
wells.
Everything among them talks, nothing succeeds any longer and accomplishes
itself. Everything cackles, but who will still sit quietly on the nest
and hatch eggs?
Everything among them talks, everything is out-talked. And that
which yesterday was still too hard for time itself and its tooth, hangs
today, outchamped and outchewed, from the mouths of the men of
today.
Everything among them talks, everything is betrayed. And what was
once called the secret and secrecy of profound souls, belongs to-day to
the street-trumpeters and other butterflies.
O human hubbub, you wonderful thing! you noise in dark streets!
Now are you again behind me: - my greatest danger lies behind me!
In indulging and pitying lay ever my greatest danger; and all human
hubbub wishes to be indulged and tolerated.
With suppressed truths, with fool's hand and befooled heart, and rich
in petty lies of pity: - thus have I ever lived among men.
Disguised did I sit among them, ready to misjudge myself that I might
endure them, and willingly saying to myself: "you fool, you do not know
men!"
One unlearns men when one lives among them: there is too much foreground
in all men - what can far-seeing, far-longing eyes do there!
And, fool that I was, when they misjudged me, I indulged them on that
account more than myself, being habitually hard on myself, and often
even taking revenge on myself for the indulgence.
147
Stung all over by poisonous flies, and hollowed like the stone by many
drops of wickedness: thus did I sit among them, and still said to myself:
"Innocent is everything petty of its pettiness!"
Especially did I find those who call themselves "the good," the most
poisonous flies; they sting in all innocence, they lie in all innocence; how
could they - be just towards me!
He who lives among the good - pity teaches him to lie. Pity makes
stifling air for all free souls. For the stupidity of the good is unfathomable.
To conceal myself and my riches - that did I learn down there: for
everyone did I still find poor in spirit. It was the lie of my pity, that I
knew in every one.
-That I saw and scented in every one, what was enough of spirit for
him, and what was too much!
Their stiff wise men: I call them wise, not stiff - thus did I learn to slur
over words.
The grave-diggers dig for themselves diseases. Under old rubbish rest
bad vapours. One should not stir up the marsh. One should live on
mountains.
With blessed nostrils do I again breathe mountain-freedom. Freed at
last is my nose from the smell of all human hubbub!
With sharp breezes tickled, as with sparkling wine, sneezes my soul -
sneezes, and shouts self-congratulatingly: "Health to you!"
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 3, (10) THE THREE EVIL THINGS
1.
IN MY dream, in my last morning-dream, I stood today on a promontory
- beyond the world; I held a pair of scales, and weighed the world.
Alas, that the rosy dawn came too early to me: she glowed me awake,
the jealous one! Jealous is she always of the glows of my morning-dream.
Measurable by him who has time, weighable by a good weigher, attainable
by strong pinions, divinable by divine nutcrackers: thus did my
dream find the world:-
My dream, a bold sailor, half-ship, half-hurricane, silent as the butterfly,
impatient as the falcon: how had it the patience and leisure to-day for
148
world-weighing!
Did my wisdom perhaps speak secretly to it, my laughing, wide-awake
day-wisdom, which mocks at all "infinite worlds"? For it says: "Where
force is, there becomes number the master: it has more force."
How confidently did my dream contemplate this finite world, not newfangledly,
not old-fangledly, not timidly, not entreatingly:-
-As if a big round apple presented itself to my hand, a ripe golden
apple, with a coolly-soft, velvety skin: - thus did the world present itself
to me:-
-As if a tree nodded to me, a broad-branched, strong-willed tree,
curved as a recline and a foot-stool for weary travellers: thus did the
world stand on my promontory:-
-As if delicate hands carried a casket towards me - a casket open for the
delectation of modest adoring eyes: thus did the world present itself before
me today:-
-Not riddle enough to scare human love from it, not solution enough to
put to sleep human wisdom: - a humanly good thing was the world to
me to-day, of which such bad things are said!
How I thank my morning-dream that I thus at today's dawn, weighed
the world! As a humanly good thing did it come to me, this dream and
heart-comforter!
And that I may do the like by day, and imitate and copy its best, now
will I put the three worst things on the scales, and weigh them humanly
well.-
He who taught to bless taught also to curse: what are the three best
cursed things in the world? These will I put on the scales.
Voluptuousness, passion for power, and selfishness: these three things
have thus far been best cursed, and have been in worst and falsest repute
- these three things will I weigh humanly well.
Well! Here is my promontory, and there is the sea - it rolls hither to me,
shaggily and fawningly, the old, faithful, hundred-headed dog-monster
that I love!-
Well! Here will I hold the scales over the weltering sea: and also a witness
do I choose to look on - you, the anchorite-tree, you, the strongodoured,
broad-arched tree that I love!-
On what bridge goes the now to the hereafter? By what constraint does
the high stoop to the low? And what enjoins even the highest still - to
grow upwards?-
Now stand the scales poised and at rest: three heavy questions have I
thrown in; three heavy answers carries the other scale.
149
2.
Voluptuousness: to all hair-shirted despisers of the body, a sting and
stake; and, cursed as "the world," by all the believers in an afterworld: for
it mocks and befools all erring, misinferring teachers.
Voluptuousness: to the rabble, the slow fire at which it is burnt; to all
wormy wood, to all stinking rags, the prepared heat and stew furnace.
Voluptuousness: to free hearts, a thing innocent and free, the gardenhappiness
of the earth, all the future's thanks-overflow to the present.
Voluptuousness: only to the withered a sweet poison; to the lionwilled,
however, the great cordial, and the reverently saved wine of
wines.
Voluptuousness: the great symbolic happiness of a higher happiness
and highest hope. For to many is marriage promised, and more than
marriage,-
-To many that are more unknown to each other than man and woman:
- and who has fully understood how unknown to each other are man
and woman!
Voluptuousness: - but I will have hedges around my thoughts, and
even around my words, lest swine and libertine should break into my
gardens!-
Passion for power: the glowing scourge of the hardest of the hearthard;
the cruel torture reserved for the cruellest themselves; the gloomy
flame of living pyres.
Passion for power: the wicked gadfly which is mounted on the vainest
peoples; the scorner of all uncertain virtue; which rids on every horse
and on every pride.
Passion for power: the earthquake which breaks and upbreaks all that
is rotten and hollow; the rolling, rumbling, punitive demolisher of
whited sepulchres; the flashing interrogative-sign beside premature answers.
Passion for power: before whose glance man creeps and crouches and
drudges, and becomes lower than the serpent and the swine: - until at
last great contempt cries out of him-,
Passion for power: the terrible teacher of great contempt, which
preaches to their face to cities and empires: "Away with you!" - until a
voice cries out of themselves: "Away with me!"
Passion for power: which, however, mounts alluringly even to the pure
and lonesome, and up to self-satisfied elevations, glowing like a love that
paint Part purple felicities alluringly on earthly heavens.
Passion for power: but who would call it passion, when the height
150
longs to stoop for power! Truly, nothing sick or diseased is there in such
longing and descending!
That the lonesome height may not forever remain lonesome and selfsufficing;
that the mountains may come to the valleys and the winds of
the heights to the plains:-
Oh, who could find the right prename and honouring name for such
longing! "Bestowing virtue" - thus did Zarathustra. once name the unnamable.
And then it happened also, - and truly, it happened for the first time! -
that his word blessed selfishness, the wholesome, healthy selfishness,
that springs from the powerful soul:-
-From the powerful soul, to which the high body appertains, the handsome,
triumphing, refreshing body, around which everything becomes a
mirror:
-The pliant, persuasive body, the dancer, whose symbol and epitome is
the self-enjoying soul. Of such bodies and souls the self-enjoyment calls
itself "virtue."
With its words of good and bad does such self-enjoyment shelter itself
as with sacred groves; with the names of its happiness does it banish
from itself everything contemptible.
Away from itself does it banish everything cowardly; it says: "Bad -
that is cowardly!" Contemptible seem to it the ever-solicitous, the sighing,
the complaining, and whoever pick up the most trifling advantage.
It despises also all bitter-sweet wisdom: for truly, there is also wisdom
that blooms in the dark, a night-shade wisdom, which ever sighs: "All is
vain!"
Shy distrust is regarded by it as base, and everyone who wants oaths
instead of looks and hands: also all over-distrustful wisdom, - for such is
the mode of cowardly souls.
Baser still it regards the obsequious, doggish one, who immediately lies
on his back, the submissive one; and there is also wisdom that is submissive,
and doggish, and pious, and obsequious.
Hateful to it altogether, and a loathing, is he who will never defend
himself, he who swallows down poisonous spittle and bad looks, the alltoo-
patient one, the all-endurer, the all-satisfied one: for that is the mode
of slaves.
Whether they be servile before gods and divine spurnings, or before
men and stupid human opinions: at all kinds of slaves does it spit, this
blessed selfishness!
Bad: thus does it call all that is spirit-broken, and sordidly-servile -
151
constrained, blinking eyes, depressed hearts, and the false submissive
style, which kisses with broad cowardly lips.
And spurious wisdom: so does it call all the wit that slaves, and hoaryheaded
and weary ones affect; and especially all the cunning, spuriouswitted,
curious-witted foolishness of priests!
The spurious wise, however, all the priests, the world-weary, and those
whose souls are of feminine and servile nature - oh, how has their game
all along abused selfishness!
And precisely that was to be virtue and was to be called virtue - to abuse
selfishness! And "selfless" - so did they wish themselves with good
reason, all those world-weary cowards and cross-spiders!
But to all those comes now the day, the change, the sword of judgment,
the great noontide: then shall many things be revealed!
And he who proclaims the ego wholesome and holy, and selfishness
blessed, truly, he, the prognosticator, speaks also what he knows:
"Behold, it comes, it is night, the great noontide!"
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 3, (11) THE SPIRIT OF GRAVITY
1.
MY MOUTHPIECE - is of the people: too coarsely and cordially do I
talk for Angora rabbits. And still stranger sounds my word to all ink-fish
and pen-foxes.
My hand - is a fool's hand: woe to all tables and walls, and whatever
has room for fool's sketching, fool's scrawling!
My foot - is a horse-foot; therewith do I trample and trot over stick and
stone, in the fields up and down, and am bedevilled with delight in all
fast racing.
My stomach - is surely an eagle's stomach? For it prefers lamb's flesh.
Certainly it is a bird's stomach.
Nourished with innocent things, and with few, ready and impatient to
fly, to fly away - that is now my nature: why should there not be
something of bird-nature therein!
And especially that I am hostile to the spirit of gravity, that is birdnature:
- truly, deadly hostile, supremely hostile, originally hostile! Oh,
where has my hostility not flown and misflown!
152
Thereof could I sing a song - - and will sing it: though I be alone in an
empty house, and must sing it to my own ears.
Other singers are there, to be sure, to whom only the full house makes
the voice soft, the hand eloquent, the eye expressive, the heart wakeful: -
those do I not resemble. -
2.
He who one day teaches men to fly will have shifted all landmarks; to
him will all landmarks themselves fly into the air; the earth will he
christen anew - as "the light body."
The ostrich runs faster than the fastest horse, but it also thrusts its head
heavily into the heavy earth: thus is it with the man who cannot yet fly.
Heavy to him are earth and life, and so wills the spirit of gravity! But
he who would become light, and be a bird, must love himself: - thus do I
teach.
Not, to be sure, with the love of the side and infected, for with them
stinks even self-love!
One must learn to love oneself - thus do I teach - with a wholesome
and healthy love: that one may endure to be with oneself, and not go
roving about.
Such roving about christens itself "brotherly love"; with these words
has there thus far been the best lying and dissembling, and especially by
those who have been burdensome to every one.
And truly, it is no commandment for today and tomorrow to learn to
love oneself. Rather is it of all arts the finest, subtlest, last and most patient.
For to its possessor is all possession well concealed, and of all treasurepits
one's own is last excavated - so causes the spirit of gravity.
Almost in the cradle are we apportioned with heavy words and
worths: "good" and "evil" - so calls itself this dowry. For the sake of it we
are forgiven for living.
And therefore suffers one little children to come to one, to forbid them
betimes to love themselves - so causes the spirit of gravity.
And we - we bear loyally what is apportioned to us, on hard shoulders,
over rugged mountains! And when we sweat, then do people say to us:
"Yes, life is hard to bear!"
But man himself only is hard to bear! The reason thereof is that he carries
too many extraneous things on his shoulders. Like the camel kneels
he down, and lets himself be well laden.
Especially the strong weight-bearing man in whom reverence resides.
Too many extraneous heavy words and worths loads he upon himself -
153
then seems life to him a desert!
And truly! Many a thing also that is our own is hard to bear! And
many internal things in man are like the oyster - repulsive and slippery
and hard to grasp;-
So that an elegant shell, with elegant adornment, must plead for them.
But this art also must one learn: to have a shell, and a fine appearance,
and sagacious blindness!
Again, it deceives about many things in man, that many a shell is poor
and pitiable, and too much of a shell. Much concealed goodness and
power is never dreamt of; the choicest dainties find no tasters!
Women know that, the choicest of them: a little fatter a little leaner - oh,
how much fate is in so little!
Man is difficult to discover, and to himself most difficult of all; often
lies the spirit concerning the soul. So causes the spirit of gravity.
He, however, has discovered himself who says: This is my good and
evil: therewith has he silenced the mole and the dwarf, who say: "Good
for all, evil for all."
Truly, neither do I like those who call everything good, and this world
the best of all. Those do I call the all-satisfied.
All-satisfiedness, which knows how to taste everything, - that is not the
best taste! I honour the refractory, fastidious tongues and stomachs,
which have learned to say "I" and "Yes" and "No."
To chew and digest everything, however - that is the genuine swinenature!
Ever to say YE-A - that has only the ass learned, and those like
it!-
Deep yellow and hot red - so wants my taste - it mixes blood with all
colours. He, however, who whitewashes his house, betrays to me a
whitewashed soul.
With mummies, some fall in love; others with phantoms: both alike
hostile to all flesh and blood - oh, how repugnant are both to my taste!
For I love blood.
And there will I not reside and abide where everyone spits and spews:
that is now my taste, - rather would I live among thieves and perjurers.
Nobody carries gold in his mouth.
Still more repugnant to me, however, are all lick-spittles; and the most
repugnant animal of man that I found, did I christen "parasite": it would
not love, and would yet live by love.
Unhappy do I call all those who have only one choice: either to become
evil beasts, or evil beast-tamers. Among such would I not build my tabernacle.
154
Unhappy do I also call those who have ever to wait, - they are repugnant
to my taste - all the toll-gatherers and traders, and kings, and other
landkeepers and shopkeepers.
Truly, I learned waiting also, and thoroughly so, - but only waiting for
myself. And above all did I learn standing and walking and running and
leaping and climbing and dancing.
This however is my teaching: he who wishes one day to fly, must first
learn standing and walking and running and climbing and dancing: -
one does not fly into flying!
With rope-ladders learned I to reach many a window, with nimble legs
did I climb high masts: to sit on high masts of perception seemed to me
no small bliss;-
-To flicker like small flames on high masts: a small light, certainly, but
a great comfort to cast-away sailors and ship-wrecked ones!
By divers ways and wendings did I arrive at my truth; not by one ladder
did I mount to the height where my eye roves into my remoteness.
And unwillingly only did I ask my way - that was always counter to
my taste! Rather did I question and test the ways themselves.
A testing and a questioning has been all my travelling: - and truly, one
must also learn to answer such questioning! That, however, - is my taste:
-Neither a good nor a bad taste, but my taste, of which I have no longer
either shame or secrecy.
"This - is now my way, - where is yours?" Thus did I answer those who
asked me "the way." For the way - it does not exist!
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 3, (12) OLD AND NEW TABLES
1.
HERE do I sit and wait, old broken tables around me and also new
half-written tables. When comes my hour?
-The hour of my descent, of my down-going: for once more will I go to
men.
For that hour do I now wait: for first must the signs come to me that it
is my hour - namely, the laughing lion with the flock of doves.
Meanwhile do I talk to myself as one who has time. No one tells me
anything new, so I tell myself my own story.
155
2.
When I came to men, then found I them resting on an old infatuation:
all of them thought they had long known what was good and bad for
men.
An old wearisome business seemed to them all discourse about virtue;
and he who wished to sleep well spoke of "good" and "bad" ere retiring
to rest.
This somnolence did I disturb when I taught that no one yet knows
what is good and bad: - unless it be the creating one!
-It is he, however, who creates man's goal, and gives to the earth its
meaning and its future: he only effects it that aught is good or bad.
And I bade them upset their old academic chairs, and wherever that
old infatuation had sat; I bade them laugh at their great moralists, their
saints, their poets, and their saviours.
At their gloomy sages did I bid them laugh, and whoever had sat admonishing
as a black scarecrow on the tree of life.
On their great grave-highway did I seat myself, and even beside the
carrion and vultures - and I laughed at all their bygone and its mellow
decaying glory.
Truly, like penitential preachers and fools did I cry wrath and shame
on all their greatness and smallness. Oh, that their best is so very small!
Oh, that their worst is so very small! Thus did I laugh.
Thus did my wise longing, born in the mountains, cry and laugh in me;
a wild wisdom, truly! - my great pinion-rustling longing.
And oft did it carry me off and up and away and in the midst of
laughter; then flew I quivering like an arrow with sun-intoxicated
rapture:
-Out into distant futures, which no dream has yet seen, into warmer
souths than ever sculptor conceived, - where gods in their dancing are
ashamed of all clothes:
(That I may speak in parables and halt and stammer like the poets: and
truly I am ashamed that I have still to be a poet!)
Where all becoming seemed to me dancing of gods, and wantoning of
gods, and the world unloosed and unbridled and fleeing back to itself:-
-As an eternal self-fleeing and re-seeking of one another of many gods,
as the blessed self-contradicting, recommuning, and refraternising with
one another of many gods:-
Where all time seemed to me a blessed mockery of moments, where necessity
was freedom itself, which played happily with the goad of freedom:-
156
Where I also found again my old devil and arch-enemy, the spirit of
gravity, and all that it created: constraint, law, necessity and consequence
and purpose and will and good and evil:-
For must there not be that which is danced over, danced beyond? Must
there not, for the sake of the nimble, the nimblest, - be moles and clumsy
dwarfs? -
3.
There was it also where I picked up from the path the word "overman,"
and that man is something that must be surpassed.
-That man is a bridge and not a goal - rejoicing over his noontides and
evenings, as advances to new rosy dawns:
-The Zarathustra word of the great noontide, and whatever else I have
hung up over men like purple evening-afterglows.
Truly, also new stars did I make them see, along with new nights; and
over cloud and day and night, did I spread out laughter like a gay-coloured
canopy.
I taught them all my poetisation and aspiration: to compose and collect
into unity what is fragment in man, and riddle and fearful chance;-
-As composer, riddle-reader, and redeemer of chance, did I teach them
to create the future, and all that has been - to redeem by creating.
The past of man to redeem, and every "It was" to transform, until the
Will says: "But so did I will it! So shall I will it-"
-This did I call redemption; this alone taught I them to call redemption.
- -
Now do I await my redemption - that I may go to them for the last
time.
For once more will I go to men: among them will my sun set; in dying
will I give them my choicest gift!
From the sun did I learn this, when it goes down, the exuberant one:
gold does it then pour into the sea, out of inexhaustible riches,-
-So that the poorest fisherman rows even with golden oars! For this did
I once see, and did not tire of weeping in beholding it. - -
Like the sun will also Zarathustra go down: now sits he here and waits,
old broken tables around him, and also new tables - half-written.
4.
Behold, here is a new table; but where are my brothers who will carry
it with me to the valley and into hearts of flesh?-
Thus demands my great love to the remotest ones: be not considerate
of your neighbour! Man is something that must be surpassed.
There are many divers ways and modes of surpassing: see you to this!
157
But only a buffoon thinks: "man can also be overleapt."
Surpass yourself even in your neighbour: and a right which you can
seize upon, shall you not allow to be given you!
What you do can no one do to you again. Behold, there is no requital.
He who cannot command himself shall obey. And many a one can
command himself, but still sorely lacks self-obedience!
5.
Thus wishes the type of noble souls: they desire to have nothing gratuitously,
least of all, life.
He who is of the populace wishes to live gratuitously; we others,
however, to whom life has given itself - we are ever considering what we
can best give in return!
And truly, it is a noble dictum which says: "What life promises us, that
promise will we keep - to life!"
One should not wish to enjoy where one does not contribute to the enjoyment.
And one should not wish to enjoy!
For enjoyment and innocence are the most bashful things. Neither like
to be sought for. One should have them, - but one should rather seek for
guilt and pain! -
6.
O my brothers, he who is a firstling is ever sacrificed. Now, however,
are we firstlings!
We all bleed on secret sacrificial altars, we all burn and broil in honour
of ancient idols.
Our best is still young: this excites old palates. Our flesh is tender, our
skin is only lambs' skin: - how could we not excite old idol-priests!
In ourselves dwells he still, the old idol-priest, who broils our best for
his banquet. Ah, my brothers, how could firstlings fail to be sacrifices!
But so wishes our type; and I love those who do not wish to preserve
themselves, the down-going ones do I love with my entire love: for they
go beyond. -
7.
To be true - that can few be! And he who can, will not! Least of all,
however, can the good be true.
Oh, those good ones! Good men never speak the truth. For the spirit,
thus to be good, is a malady.
They yield, those good ones, they submit themselves; their heart repeats,
their soul obeys: he, however, who obeys, does not listen to himself!
All that is called evil by the good, must come together in order that one
158
truth may be born. O my brothers, are you also evil enough for this
truth?
The daring venture, the prolonged distrust, the cruel No, the tedium,
the cutting-into-the-quick - how seldom do these come together! Out of
such seed, however - is truth produced!
Beside the bad conscience has thus far grown all knowledge! Break up,
break up, you discerning ones, the old tables!
8.
When the water has planks, when gangways and railings overspan the
stream, truly, he is not believed who then says: "All is in flux."
But even the simpletons contradict him. "What?" say the simpletons,
"all in flux? Planks and railings are still over the stream!
"Over the stream all is stable, all the values of things, the bridges and
bearings, all 'good' and 'evil': these are all stable!"-
Comes, however, the hard winter, the stream-tamer, then learn even
the wittiest distrust, and truly, not only the simpletons then say: "Should
not everything - stand still?"
"Fundamentally stands everything still" - that is an appropriate winter
doctrine, good cheer for an unproductive period, a great comfort for
winter-sleepers and fireside-loungers.
"Fundamentally stands everything still"-: but contrary to this, preaches
the thawing wind!
The thawing wind, a bullock, which is no ploughing bullock - a furious
bullock, a destroyer, which with angry horns breaks the ice! The ice
however - - breaks gangways!
O my brothers, is not everything at present in flux? Have not all railings
and gangways fallen into the water? Who would still hold on to
"good" and "evil"?
"Woe to us! Hail to us! The thawing wind blows!" - Thus preach, my
brothers, through all the streets!
9.
There is an old illusion - it is called good and evil. Around soothsayers
and astrologers has thus far revolved the orbit of this illusion.
Once did one believe in soothsayers and astrologers; and therefore did
one believe, "Everything is fate: you shall, for you must!"
Then again did one distrust all soothsayers and astrologers; and therefore
did one believe, "Everything is freedom: you can, for you will!"
O my brothers, concerning the stars and the future there has thus far
been only illusion, and not knowledge; and therefore concerning good
and evil there has thus far been only illusion and not knowledge!
159
10.
"you shall not rob! you shall not slay!" - such precepts were once called
holy; before them did one bow the knee and the head, and take off one's
shoes.
But I ask you: Where have there ever been better robbers and slayers in
the world than such holy precepts?
Is there not even in all life - robbing and slaying? And for such precepts
to be called holy, was not truth itself thereby - slain?
-Or was it a sermon of death that called holy what contradicted and
dissuaded from life? - O my brothers, break up, break up for me the old
tables!
11.
It is my sympathy with all the past that I see it is abandoned,-
-Abandoned to the favour, the spirit and the madness of every generation
that comes, and reinterprets all that has been as its bridge!
A great potentate might arise, an artful prodigy, who with approval
and disapproval could strain and constrain all the past, until it became
for him a bridge, a harbinger, a herald, and a cock-crowing.
This however is the other danger, and my other sympathy: - he who is
of the populace, his thoughts go back to his grandfather, - with his
grandfather, however, does time cease.
Thus is all the past abandoned: for it might some day happen for the
populace to become master, and drown all time in shallow waters.
Therefore, O my brothers, a new nobility is needed, which shall be the
adversary of all populace and potentate rule, and shall inscribe anew the
word "noble" on new tables.
For many noble ones are needed, and many kinds of noble ones, for a
new nobility! Or, as I once said in parable: "That is just divinity, that
there are gods, but no God!"
12.
O my brothers, I consecrate you and point you to a new nobility: you
shall become procreators and cultivators and sowers of the future;-
-Truly, not to a nobility which you could purchase like traders with
traders' gold; for little worth is all that has its price.
Let it not be your honour henceforth whence you come, but where you
go! Your Will and your feet which seek to surpass you - let these be your
new honour!
Truly, not that you have served a prince - of what account are princes
now! - nor that you have become a bulwark to that which stands, that it
may stand more firmly.
160
Not that your family have become courtly at courts, and that you have
learned - gay-coloured, like the flamingo - to stand long hours in shallow
pools:
(For ability-to-stand is a merit in courtiers; and all courtiers believe that
to blessedness after death pertains - permission-to-sit!)
Nor even that a Spirit called Holy, led your forefathers into promised
lands, which I do not praise: for where the worst of all trees grew - the
cross, - in that land there is nothing to praise!-
-And truly, wherever this "Holy Spirit" led its knights, always in such
campaigns did - goats and geese, and wry-heads and guy-heads run
foremost!-
O my brothers, not backward shall your nobility gaze, but outward!
Exiles shall you be from all fatherlands and forefather-lands!
Your children's land shall you love: let this love be your new nobility, -
the undiscovered in the remotest seas! For it do I bid your sails search
and search!
to your children shall you make amends for being the children of your
fathers: all the past shall you thus redeem! This new table do I place over
you!
13.
"Why should one live? All is vain! To live - that is to thresh straw; to
live - that is to burn oneself and yet not get warm.-
Such ancient babbling still passes for "wisdom"; because it is old,
however, and smells mustily, therefore is it the more honoured. Even
mould ennobles.-
Children might thus speak: they shun the fire because it has burnt
them! There is much childishness in the old books of wisdom.
And he who ever "threshes straw," why should he be allowed to rail at
threshing! Such a fool one would have to muzzle!
Such persons sit down to the table and bring nothing with them, not
even good hunger: - and then do they rail: "All is vain!"
But to eat and drink well, my brothers, is truly no vain art! Break up,
break up for me the tables of the never-joyous ones!
14.
"To the clean are all things clean" - thus say the people. I, however, say
to you: To the swine all things become swinish!
Therefore preach the visionaries and bowed-heads (whose hearts are
also bowed down): "The world itself is a filthy monster."
For these are all unclean spirits; especially those, however, who have
no peace or rest, unless they see the world from the backside - the
161
believers in an afterworld!
To those do I say it to the face, although it sound unpleasantly: the
world resembles man, in that it has a backside, - so much is true!
There is in the world much filth: so much is true! But the world itself is
not therefore a filthy monster!
There is wisdom in the fact that much in the world smells badly: loathing
itself creates wings, and fountain-divining powers!
In the best there is still something to loathe; and the best is still
something that must be surpassed!-
O my brothers, there is much wisdom in the fact that much filth is in
the world! -
15.
Such sayings did I hear pious the believers in an afterworld speak to
their consciences, and truly without wickedness or guile, - although
there is nothing more guileful in the world, or more wicked.
"Let the world be as it is! Raise not a finger against it!"
"Let whoever will choke and stab and skin and scrape the people: raise
not a finger against it! Thereby will they learn to renounce the world."
"And your own reason - this shall you yourself stifle and choke; for it is
a reason of this world, - thereby will you learn yourself to renounce the
world."-
-Shatter, shatter, O my brothers, those old tables of the pious! Tatter the
maxims of the world-maligners! -
16.
"He who learns much unlearns all violent cravings" - that do people
now whisper to one another in all the dark lanes.
"Wisdom wearies, nothing is worthwhile; you shall not crave!" - this
new table found I hanging even in the public markets.
Break up for me, O my brothers, break up also that new table! The
weary-o'-the-world put it up, and the preachers of death and the jailer:
for behold, it is also a sermon for slavery:-
Because they learned badly and not the best, and everything too early
and everything too fast; because they ate badly: from thence has resulted
their ruined stomach;-
-For a ruined stomach, is their spirit: it persuades to death! For truly,
my brothers, the spirit is a stomach!
Life is a well of delight, but to him in whom the ruined stomach
speaks, the father of affliction, all fountains are poisoned.
To discern: that is delight to the lion-willed! But he who has become
weary, is himself merely "willed"; with him play all the waves.
162
And such is always the nature of weak men: they lose themselves on
their way. And at last asks their weariness: "Why did we ever go on the
way? All is indifferent!"
To them sounds it pleasant to have preached in their ears: "Nothing is
worthwhile! you shall not will!" That, however, is a sermon for slavery.
O my brothers, a fresh blustering wind comes Zarathustra to all wayweary
ones; many noses will he yet make sneeze!
Even through walls blows my free breath, and into prisons and imprisoned
spirits!
Willing emancipates: for willing is creating: so do I teach. And only for
creating shall you learn!
And also the learning shall you learn only from me, the learning well! -
He who has ears let him hear!
17.
There stands the boat - there goes it over, perhaps into vast nothingness
- but who wills to enter into this "Perhaps"?
None of you want to enter into the death-boat! How should you then
be world-weary ones!
World-weary ones! And have not even withdrawn from the earth!
Eager did I ever find you for the earth, amorous still of your own earthweariness!
Not in vain does your lip hang down: - a small worldly wish still sits
thereon! And in your eye - floats there not a cloudlet of unforgotten
earthly bliss?
There are on the earth many good inventions, some useful, some pleasant:
for their sake is the earth to be loved.
And many such good inventions are there, that they are like woman's
breasts: useful at the same time, and pleasant.
You world-weary ones, however! you earth-idlers! You, shall one beat
with stripes! With stripes shall one again make you sprightly limbs.
For if you be not invalids, or decrepit creatures, of whom the earth is
weary, then are you sly sloths, or dainty, sneaking pleasure-cats. And if
you will not again run gaily, then shall you - pass away!
To the incurable shall one not seek to be a physician: thus teaches
Zarathustra: - so shall you pass away!
But more courage is needed to make an end than to make a new verse:
that do all physicians and poets know well. -
18.
O my brothers, there are tables which weariness framed, and tables
which slothfulness framed, corrupt slothfulness: although they speak
163
similarly, they want to be heard differently.-
See this languishing one! Only a span-breadth is he from his goal; but
from weariness has he lain down obstinately in the dust, this brave one!
From weariness yawns he at the path, at the earth, at the goal, and at
himself: not a step further will he go, - this brave one!
Now glows the sun upon him, and the dogs lick at his sweat: but he
lies there in his obstinacy and prefers to languish:-
-A span-breadth from his goal, to languish! Truly, you will have to
drag him into his heaven by the hair of his head - this hero!
Better still that you let him lie where he has lain down, that sleep may
come to him, the comforter, with cooling patter-rain.
Let him lie, until of his own accord he awakens, - until of his own accord
he repudiates all weariness, and what weariness has taught through
him!
Only, my brothers, see that you scare the dogs away from him, the idle
skulkers, and all the swarming vermin:-
-All the swarming vermin of the "cultured," that - feast on the sweat of
every hero! -
19.
I form circles around me and holy boundaries; ever fewer ascend with
me ever higher mountains: I build a mountain-range out of ever holier
mountains.-
But wherever you would ascend with me, O my brothers, take care lest
a parasite ascend with you!
A parasite: that is a reptile, a creeping, cringing reptile, that tries to fatten
on your infirm and sore places.
And this is its art: it divines where ascending souls are weary, in your
trouble and dejection, in your sensitive modesty, does it build its loathsome
nest.
Where the strong are weak, where the noble are all-too-gentle - there
builds it its loathsome nest; the parasite lives where the great have small
sore-places.
What is the highest of all species of being, and what is the lowest? The
parasite is the lowest species; he, however, who is of the highest species
feeds most parasites.
For the soul which has the longest ladder, and can go deepest down:
how could there fail to be most parasites upon it?-
-The most comprehensive soul, which can run and stray and rove furthest
in itself; the most necessary soul, which out of joy flings itself into
chance:-
164
-The soul in Being, which plunges into Becoming; the possessing soul,
which seeks to attain desire and longing:-
-The soul fleeing from itself, which overtakes itself in the widest circuit;
the wisest soul, to which folly speaks most sweetly:-
-The soul most self-loving, in which all things have their current and
counter-current, their ebb and their flow: - oh, how could the loftiest soul
fail to have the worst parasites?
20.
O my brothers, am I then cruel? But I say: What falls, that shall one also
push!
Everything of today - it falls, it decays; who would preserve it! But I - I
wish also to push it!
Know you the delight which rolls stones into precipitous depths? -
Those men of today, see just how they roll into my depths!
A prelude am I to better players, O my brothers! An example! Do according
to my example!
And him whom you do not teach to fly, teach I pray you - to fall faster!
-
21.
I love the brave: but it is not enough to be a swordsman, - one must
also know whereon to use swordsmanship!
And often is it greater bravery to keep quiet and pass by, that thereby
one may reserve oneself for a worthier foe!
You shall only have foes to be hated; but not foes to be despised: you
must be proud of your foes. Thus have I already taught.
For the worthier foe, O my brothers, shall you reserve yourselves:
therefore must you pass by many a one,-
-Especially many of the rabble, who din your ears with noise about
people and peoples.
Keep your eye clear of their For and Against! There is there much right,
much wrong: he who looks on becomes wroth.
Therein viewing, therein hewing - they are the same thing: therefore
depart into the forests and lay your sword to sleep!
Go your ways! and let the people and peoples go theirs! - gloomy
ways, truly, on which not a single hope glints any more!
Let there the trader rule, where all that still glitters is - traders' gold. It
is the time of kings no longer: that which now calls itself the people is
unworthy of kings.
See how these peoples themselves now do just like the traders: they
pick up the smallest advantage out of all kinds of rubbish!
165
They lay lures for one another, they lure things out of one another, -
that they call "good neighbourliness." O blessed remote period when a
people said to itself: "I will be - master over peoples!"
For, my brothers, the best shall rule, the best also wills to rule! And
where the teaching is different, there - the best is lacking.
22.
If they had - bread for nothing, Alas. for what would they cry! Their
maintainment - that is their true entertainment; and they shall have it
hard!
Beasts of prey, are they: in their "working" - there is even plundering,
in their "earning" - there is even over-reaching! Therefore shall they have
it hard!
Better beasts of prey shall they thus become, subtler, cleverer, more
man-like: for man is the best beast of prey.
All the animals has man already robbed of their virtues: that is why of
all animals it has been hardest for man.
Only the birds are still beyond him. And if man should yet learn to fly,
Alas. to what height - would his rapacity fly!
23.
Thus would I have man and woman: fit for war, the one; fit for maternity,
the other; both, however, fit for dancing with head and legs.
And lost be the day to us in which a measure has not been danced.
And false be every truth which has not had laughter along with it!
24.
Your marriage-arranging: see that it be not a bad arranging! you have
arranged too hastily: so there follows from that - marriage-breaking!
And better marriage-breaking than marriage-bending, marriage-lying!
- Thus spoke a woman to me: "Indeed, I broke the marriage, but first did
the marriage break - me!
The badly paired found I ever the most revengeful: they make everyone
suffer for it that they no longer run singly.
On that account want I the honest ones to say to one another: "We love
each other: let us see to it that we maintain our love! Or shall our
pledging be blundering?"
-"Give us a set term and a small marriage, that we may see if we are fit
for the great marriage! It is a great matter always to be twain."
Thus do I counsel all honest ones; and what would be my love to the
overman, and to all that is to come, if I should counsel and speak otherwise!
Not only to propagate yourselves onwards but upwards - to this, O my
166
brothers, may the garden of marriage help you!
25.
He who has grown wise concerning old origins, behold, he will at last
seek after the fountains of the future and new origins.-
O my brothers, not long will it be until new peoples shall arise and new
fountains shall rush down into new depths.
For the earthquake - it chokes up many wells, it causes much languishing:
but it brings also to light inner powers and secrets.
The earthquake discloses new fountains. In the earthquake of old
peoples new fountains burst forth.
And whoever calls out: "Behold, here is a well for many thirsty ones,
one heart for many longing ones, one will for many instruments": -
around him collects a people, that is to say, many attempting ones.
Who can command, who must obey - that is there attempted! Ah, with
what long seeking and solving and failing and learning and re-attempting!
Human society: it is an attempt - so I teach - a long seeking: it seeks
however the ruler!-
-An attempt, my brothers! And no "contract"! Destroy, I pray you, destroy
that word of the soft-hearted and half-and-half!
26.
O my brothers! With whom lies the greatest danger to the whole human
future? Is it not with the good and just?-
-As those who say and feel in their hearts: "We already know what is
good and just, we possess it also; woe to those who still seek thereafter!
And whatever harm the wicked may do, the harm of the good is the
most harmful harm!
And whatever harm the world-maligners may do, the harm of the
good is the most harmful harm!
O my brothers, into the hearts of the good and just looked someone
once on a time, who said: "They are the Pharisees." But people did not
understand him.
The good and just themselves were not free to understand him; their
spirit was imprisoned in their good conscience. The stupidity of the good
is unfathomably wise.
It is the truth, however, that the good must be Pharisees - they have no
choice!
The good must crucify him who devises his own virtue! That is the
truth!
The second one, however, who discovered their country - the country,
167
heart and soul of the good and just, - it was he who asked: "Whom do
they hate most?"
The creator, hate they most, him who breaks the tables and old values,
the breaker, - him they call the law-breaker.
For the good - they cannot create; they are always the beginning of the
end:-
-They crucify him who writes new values on new tables, they sacrifice
to themselves the future - they crucify the whole human future!
The good - they have always been the beginning of the end. -
27.
O my brothers, have you also understood this word? And what I once
said of the "last man"? - -
With whom lies the greatest danger to the whole human future? Is it
not with the good and just?
Break up, break up, I pray you, the good and just! - O my brothers,
have you understood also this word?
28.
You flee from me? you are frightened? you tremble at this word?
O my brothers, when I enjoined you to break up the good, and the
tables of the good, then only did I embark man on his high seas.
And now only comes to him the great terror, the great outlook, the
great sickness, the great nausea, the great seasickness.
False shores and false securities did the good teach you; in the lies of
the good you were born and bred. Everything has been radically contorted
and distorted by the good.
But he who discovered the country of "man," discovered also the country
of "man's future." Now shall you be sailors for me, brave, patient!
Keep yourselves up betimes, my brothers, learn to keep yourselves up!
The sea storms: many seek to raise themselves again by you.
The sea storms: all is in the sea. Well! Cheer up! you old seaman-hearts!
What of fatherland! There strives our helm where our children's land
is! In that direction, stormier than the sea, storms our great longing! -
29.
"Why so hard!" - said to the diamond one day the charcoal; "are we
then not near relatives?"-
Why so soft? O my brothers; thus do I ask you: are you then not - my
brothers?
Why so soft, so submissive and yielding? Why is there so much negation
and abnegation in your hearts? Why is there so little fate in your
looks?
168
And if you will not be fates and inexorable ones, how can you one day
- conquer with me?
And if your hardness will not glance and cut and chip to pieces, how
can you one day - create with me?
For the creators are hard. And blessedness must it seem to you to press
your hand upon millenniums as upon wax,-
-Blessedness to write upon the will of millenniums as upon brass, -
harder than brass, nobler than brass. Entirely hard is only the noblest.
This new table, O my brothers, put I up over you: Become hard! -
30.
O you, my Will! you change of every need, my needfulness! Preserve
me from all small victories!
You fatedness of my soul, which I call fate! you In-me! Over-me! Preserve
and spare me for one great fate!
And your last greatness, my Will, spare it for your last - that you may
be inexorable in your victory! Ah, who has not succumbed to his victory!
Ah, whose eye has not bedimmed in this intoxicated twilight! Ah,
whose foot has not faltered and forgotten in victory - how to stand!-
-That I may one day be ready and ripe in the great noon-tide: ready
and ripe like the glowing ore, the lightning-bearing cloud, and the
swelling milk-udder:-
-Ready for myself and for my most hidden Will: a bow eager for its arrow,
an arrow eager for its star:-
-A star, ready and ripe in its noontide, glowing, pierced, blessed, by
annihilating sun-arrows:-
-A sun itself, and an inexorable sun-will, ready for annihilation in victory!
O Will, you change of every need, my needfulness! Spare me for one
great victory! - -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 3, (13) THE CONVALESCENT
1.
ONE morning, not long after his return to his cave, Zarathustra sprang
up from his couch like a madman, crying with a frightful voice, and acting
as if someone still lay on the couch who did not wish to rise.
169
Zarathustra's voice also resounded in such a manner that his animals
came to him frightened, and out of all the neighbouring caves and
lurking-places all the creatures slipped away - flying, fluttering, creeping
or leaping, according to their variety of foot or wing. Zarathustra,
however, spoke these words:
Up, abysmal thought out of my depth! I am your cock and morning
dawn, you overslept reptile: Up! Up! My voice shall soon crow you
awake!
Unbind the fetters of your ears: listen! For I wish to hear your! Up! Up!
There is thunder enough to make the very graves listen!
And rub the sleep and all the dimness and blindness out of your eyes!
Hear me also with your eyes: my voice is a medicine even for those born
blind.
And once you are awake, then shall you ever remain awake. It is not
my custom to awake great-grandmothers out of their sleep that I may
bid them - sleep on!
You stir, stretch yourself, wheezes? Up! Up! Not wheeze, shall you, -
but speak to me! Zarathustra calls you, Zarathustra the godless!
I, Zarathustra, the advocate of living, the advocate of suffering, the advocate
of the circuit - you do I call, my most abysmal thought!
Joy to me! you come, - I hear your! My abyss speaks, my lowest depth
have I turned over into the light!
Joy to me! Come hither! Give me your hand - - ha! let be! aha! - - Disgust,
disgust, disgust - - - alas to me!
2.
Hardly, however, had Zarathustra spoken these words, when he fell
down as one dead, and remained long as one dead. When however he
again came to himself, then was he pale and trembling, and remained lying;
and for long he would neither eat nor drink. This condition continued
for seven days; his animals, however, did not leave him day nor
night, except that the eagle flew forth to fetch food. And what it fetched
and foraged, it laid on Zarathustra's couch: so that Zarathustra at last lay
among yellow and red berries, grapes, rosy apples, sweet-smelling herbage,
and pine-cones. At his feet, however, two lambs were stretched,
which the eagle had with difficulty carried off from their shepherds.
At last, after seven days, Zarathustra raised himself upon his couch,
took a rosy apple in his hand, smelt it and found its smell pleasant. Then
did his animals think the time had come to speak to him.
"O Zarathustra," said they, "now have you lain thus for seven days
with heavy eyes: will you not set yourself again upon your feet?
170
Step out of your cave: the world waits for you as a garden. The wind
plays with heavy fragrance which seeks for you; and all brooks would
like to run after you.
All things long for you, since you have remained alone for seven days -
step forth out of your cave! All things want to be your physicians!
Did perhaps a new knowledge come to you, a bitter, grievous knowledge?
Like leavened dough you lay, your soul arose and swelled beyond
all its bounds.-"
-O my animals, answered Zarathustra, talk on thus and let me listen! It
refreshes me so to hear your talk: where there is talk, there is the world
as a garden to me.
How charming it is that there are words and tones; are not words and
tones rainbows and seeming bridges between the eternally separated?
To each soul belongs another world; to each soul is every other soul a
back-world.
Among the most alike does semblance deceive most delightfully: for
the smallest gap is most difficult to bridge over.
For me - how could there be an outside-of-me? There is no outside! But
this we forget on hearing tones; how delightful it is that we forget!
Have not names and tones been given to things that man may refresh
himself with them? It is a beautiful folly, speaking; therewith dances
man over everything.
How lovely is all speech and all falsehoods of tones! With tones dances
our love on variegated rainbows.-
-"O Zarathustra," said then his animals, "to those who think like us,
things all dance themselves: they come and hold out the hand and laugh
and flee - and return.
Everything goes, everything returns; eternally rolls the wheel of existence.
Everything dies, everything blossoms forth again; eternally runs on
the year of existence.
Everything breaks, everything is integrated anew; eternally builds itself
the same house of existence. All things separate, all things again greet
one another; eternally true to itself remains the ring of existence.
Every moment begins existence, around every 'Here' rolls the ball
'There.' The middle is everywhere. Crooked is the path of eternity."-
-O you wags and barrel-organs! answered Zarathustra, and smiled
once more, how well do you know what had to be fulfilled in seven
days:-
-And how that monster crept into my throat and choked me! But I bit
off its head and spat it away from me.
171
And you - you have made a lyre-lay out of it? Now, however, do I lie
here, still exhausted with that biting and spitting-away, still sick with my
own salvation.
And you looked on at it all? O my animals, are you also cruel? Did you
like to look at my great pain as men do? For man is the cruellest animal.
At tragedies, bull-fights, and crucifixions has he thus far been happiest
on earth; and when he invented his hell, behold, that was his heaven on
earth.
When the great man cries-: immediately runs the little man there, and
his tongue hangs out of his mouth for very lusting. He, however, calls it
his "pity."
The little man, especially the poet - how passionately does he accuse
life in words! Listen to him, but do not fail to hear the delight which is in
all accusation!
Such accusers of life - them life overcomes with a glance of the eye.
"you lovest me?" says the insolent one; "wait a little, as yet have I no time
for you."
Towards himself man is the cruellest animal; and in all who call themselves
"sinners" and "bearers of the cross" and "penitents," do not overlook
the voluptuousness in their plaints and accusations!
And I myself - do, I thereby want to be man's accuser? Ah, my animals,
this only have I learned thus far, that for man his most bad is necessary
for his best,-
-That all that is most bad is the best power, and the hardest stone for
the highest creator; and that man must become better and more bad:-
Not to this torture-stake was I tied, that I know man is bad, - but I
cried, as no one has yet cried:
"Ah, that his most bad is so very small! Ah, that his best is so very
small!"
The great disgust at man - it strangled me and had crept into my
throat: and what the soothsayer had presaged: "All is alike, nothing is
worthwhile, knowledge strangles."
A long twilight limped on before me, a fatally weary, fatally intoxicated
sadness, which spoke with yawning mouth.
"Eternally he returns, the man of whom you are weary, the small man"
- so yawned my sadness, and dragged its foot and could not go to sleep.
A cavern, became the human earth to me; its breast caved in;
everything living became to me human dust and bones and mouldering
past.
My sighing sat on all human graves, and could no longer arise: my
172
sighing and questioning croaked and choked, and gnawed and nagged
day and night:
-"Ah, man returns eternally! The small man returns eternally!"
Naked had I once seen both of them, the greatest man and the smallest
man: all too like one another - all too human, even the greatest man!
All too small, even the greatest man! - that was my disgust at man!
And the eternal return also of the smallest man! - that was my disgust at
all existence!
Ah, Disgust! Disgust! Disgust! - - Thus spoke Zarathustra, and sighed
and shuddered; for he remembered his sickness. Then did his animals
prevent him from speaking further.
"Do not speak further, you convalescent!" - so answered his animals,
"but go out where the world waits for you like a garden.
Go out to the roses, the bees, and the flocks of doves! Especially,
however, to the singing-birds, to learn singing from them!
For singing is for the convalescent; the sound ones may talk. And when
the sound also want songs, then want they other songs than the convalescent."
-"O you wags and barrel-organs, do be silent!" answered Zarathustra,
and smiled at his animals. "How well you know what consolation I devised
for myself in seven days!
That I have to sing once more - that consolation did I devise for myself,
and this convalescence: would you also make another lyre-lay thereof?"
-"Do not talk further," answered his animals once more; "rather, you
convalescent, prepare for yourself first a lyre, a new lyre!
For behold, O Zarathustra! For your new lays there are needed new
lyres.
Sing and bubble over, O Zarathustra, heal your soul with new lays:
that you may bear your great fate, which has not yet been any one's fate!
For your animals know it well, O Zarathustra, who you are and must
become: behold, you are the teacher of the eternal return, - that is now
your fate!
That you must be the first to teach this teaching - how could this great
fate not be your greatest danger and infirmity!
Behold, we know what you teach: that all things eternally return, and
ourselves with them, and that we have already existed times without
number, and all things with us.
You teach that there is a great year of Becoming, a prodigy of a great
year; it must, like a sand-glass, ever turn up anew, that it may anew run
down and run out:-
173
-So that all those years are like one another in the greatest and also in
the smallest, so that we ourselves, in every great year, are like ourselves
in the greatest and also in the smallest.
And if you would now die, O Zarathustra, behold, we know also how
you would then speak to yourself: - but your animals beseech you not to
die yet!
You would speak, and without trembling, buoyant rather with bliss,
for a great weight and worry would be taken from you, you most patient
one!-
'Now do I die and disappear,' would you say, 'and in a moment I am
nothing. Souls are as mortal as bodies.
But the plexus of causes returns in which I am intertwined, - it will
again create me! I myself pertain to the causes of the eternal return.
I come again with this sun, with this earth, with this eagle, with this
serpent - not to a new life, or a better life, or a similar life:
-I come again eternally to this identical and selfsame life, in its greatest
and its smallest, to teach again the eternal return of all things,-
-To speak again the word of the great noontide of earth and man, to announce
again to man the overman.
I have spoken my word. I break down by my word: so wills my eternal
fate - as announcer do I succumb!
The hour has now come for the down-goer to bless himself. Thus - ends
Zarathustra's down-going.'" - -
When the animals had spoken these words they were silent and
waited, so that Zarathustra might say something to them; but Zarathustra
did not hear that they were silent. On the contrary, he lay quietly
with closed eyes like a person sleeping, although he did not sleep; for he
communed just then with his soul. The serpent, however, and the eagle,
when they found him silent in such wise, respected the great stillness
around him, and prudently retired.
Part 3, (14) THE GREAT LONGING
O MY soul, I have taught you to say "today" as "once on a time" and
"formerly," and to dance your measure over every Here and There and
Yonder.
O my soul, I delivered you from all by-places, I brushed down from
174
you dust and spiders and twilight.
O my soul, I washed the petty shame and the by-place virtue from you,
and persuaded you to stand naked before the eyes of the sun.
With the storm that is called "spirit" did I blow over your surging sea;
all clouds did I blow away from it; I strangled even the strangler called
"sin."
O my soul, I gave you the right to say No like the storm, and to say yes
as the open heaven says Yes: calm as the light you remain, and now walk
through denying storms.
O my soul, I restored to you liberty over the created and the uncreated;
and who knows, as you know, the voluptuousness of the future?
O my soul, I taught you the contempt which does not come like wormeating,
the great, the loving contempt, which loves most where it contemns
most.
O my soul, I taught you so to persuade that you persuade even the
grounds themselves to you: like the sun, which persuades even the sea to
its height.
O my soul, I have taken from you all obeying and knee-bending and
homage-paying; I have myself given you the names, "Change of need"
and "Fate."
O my soul, I have given you new names and gay-coloured playthings, I
have called you "Fate" and "the Circuit of circuits" and "the Navel-string
of time" and "the Azure bell."
O my soul, to your domain gave I all wisdom to drink all new wines,
and also all immemorially old strong wines of wisdom.
O my soul, every sun shed I upon you, and every night and every silence
and every longing: - then grew you up for me as a vine.
O my soul, exuberant and heavy do you now stand forth, a vine with
swelling udders and full clusters of brown golden grapes:-
-Filled and weighted by your happiness, waiting from superabundance,
and yet ashamed of your waiting.
O my soul, there is nowhere a soul which could be more loving and
more comprehensive and more extensive! Where could future and past
be closer together than with you?
O my soul, I have given you everything, and all my hands have become
empty by you: - and now! Now say you to me, smiling and full of
melancholy: "Which of us owes thanks?-
-does the giver not owe thanks because the receiver received? Is bestowing
not a necessity? Is receiving not - pitying?"
O my soul, I understand the smiling of your melancholy: your over-
175
abundance itself now stretchs out longing hands!
Your fullness looks forth over raging seas, and seeks and waits: the
longing of over-fulness looks forth from the smiling heaven of your eyes!
And truly, O my soul! Who could see your smiling and not melt into
tears? The angels themselves melt into tears through the over-graciousness
of your smiling.
Your graciousness and over-graciousness, is it which will not complain
and weep: and yet, O my soul, longs your smiling for tears, and your
trembling mouth for sobs.
"Is not all weeping complaining? And all complaining, accusing?" Thus
speak you to yourself; and therefore, O my soul, will you rather smile
than pour forth your grief-
-Than in gushing tears pour forth all your grief concerning your fullness,
and concerning the craving of the vine for the vintager and vintageknife!
But will you not weep, will you not weep forth your purple melancholy,
then will you have to sing, O my soul! - Behold, I smile myself,
who foretell you this:
-you will have to sing with passionate song, until all seas turn calm to
listen to your longing,-
-Until over calm longing seas the bark glides, the golden marvel,
around the gold of which all good, bad, and marvellous things frisk:-
-Also many large and small animals, and everything that has light marvellous
feet, so that it can run on violet-blue paths,-
-Towards the golden marvel, the spontaneous bark, and its master: he,
however, is the vintager who waits with the diamond vintage-knife,-
-your great deliverer, O my soul, the nameless one - for whom future
songs only will find names! And truly, already has your breath the fragrance
of future songs,-
-Already glow you and dream, already drink you thirstily at all deep
echoing wells of consolation, already reposes your melancholy in the
bliss of future songs! - -
O my soul, now have I given you all, and even my last possession, and
all my hands have become empty by you: - that I bade you sing, behold,
that was my last thing to give!
That I bade you sing, - say now, say: which of us now - owes thanks? -
Better still, however: sing to me, sing, O my soul! And let me thank you!
-
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
176
Part 3, (15) THE SECOND DANCE SONG
1.
"INTO your eyes gazed I lately, O Life: gold saw I gleam in your nighteyes,
- my heart stood still with delight:
-A golden bark saw I gleam on darkened waters, a sinking, drinking,
reblinking, golden swing-bark!
At my dance-frantic foot, do you cast a glance, a laughing, questioning,
melting, thrown glance:
Twice only moved you your rattle with your little hands - then did my
feet swing with dance-fury.-
My heels reared aloft, my toes they listened, - you they would know:
has not the dancer his ear - in his toe!
to you did I spring: then fled you back from my bound; and towards
me waved your fleeing, flying tresses round!
Away from you did I spring, and from your snaky tresses: then stood
you there half-turned, and in your eye caresses.
With crooked glances - do you teach me crooked courses; on crooked
courses learn my feet - crafty fancies!
I fear you near, I love you far; your flight allures me, your seeking secures
me: - I suffer, but for you, what would I not gladly bear!
For you, whose coldness inflames, whose hatred misleads, whose flight
enchains, whose mockery - pleads:
-Who would not hate you, you great bindress, in-windress, temptress,
seekress, findress! Who would not love you, you innocent, impatient,
wind-swift, child-eyed sinner!
where pull you me now, you paragon and tomboy? And now fool you
me fleeing; you sweet romp do annoy!
I dance after you, I follow even faint traces lonely. Where are you? Give
me your hand! Or your finger only!
Here are caves and thickets: we shall go astray! - Halt! Stand still! See
you not owls and bats in fluttering fray?
You bat! you owl! you would play me foul? Where are we? From the
dogs have you learned thus to bark and howl.
You gnash on me sweetly with little white teeth; your evil eyes shoot
out upon me, your curly little mane from underneath!
177
This is a dance over stock and stone: I am the hunter, - will you be my
hound, or my chamois anon?
Now beside me! And quickly, wickedly springing! Now up! And over!
- Alas. I have fallen myself overswinging!
Oh, see me lying, you arrogant one, and imploring grace! Gladly
would I walk with you - in some lovelier place!
-In the paths of love, through bushes variegated, quiet, trim! Or there
along the lake, where gold-fishes dance and swim!
You are now a-weary? There above are sheep and sun-set stripes: is it
not sweet to sleep - the shepherd pipes?
You are so very weary? I carry you there; let just your arm sink! And
are you thirsty - I should have something; but your mouth would not
like it to drink!-
-Oh, that cursed, nimble, supple serpent and lurking-witch! Where are
you gone? But in my face do I feel through your hand, two spots and red
blotches itch!
I am truly weary of it, ever your sheepish shepherd to be. you witch, if
I have thus far sung to you, now shall you - cry to me!
To the rhythm of my whip shall you dance and cry! I forget not my
whip? - Not I!" -
2.
Then did Life answer me thus, and kept thereby her fine ears closed:
"O Zarathustra! Crack not so terribly with your whip! you know surely
that noise kills thought, - and just now there came to me such delicate
thoughts.
We are both of us genuine ne'er-do-wells and ne'er-do-ills. Beyond
good and evil found we our island and our green meadow - we two
alone! Therefore must we be friendly to each other!
And even should we not love each other from the bottom of our hearts,
- must we then have a grudge against each other if we do not love each
other perfectly?
And that I am friendly to you, and often too friendly, that know you:
and the reason is that I am envious of your Wisdom. Ah, this mad old
fool, Wisdom!
If your Wisdom should one day run away from you, ah! then would
also my love run away from you quickly." -
Thereupon did Life look thoughtfully behind and around, and said
softly: "O Zarathustra, you are not faithful enough to me!
You love me not nearly so much as you say; I know you think of soon
leaving me.
178
There is an old heavy, heavy, booming-clock: it booms by night up to
your cave:-
-When you hear this clock strike the hours at midnight, then think you
between one and twelve thereon-
-you think thereon, O Zarathustra, I know it - of soon leaving me!"-
"Yes," answered I, hesitatingly, "but you know it also" - And I said
something into her ear, in among her confused, yellow, foolish tresses.
"you know that, O Zarathustra? That knows no one - -"
And we gazed at each other, and looked at the green meadow over
which the cool evening was just passing, and we wept together. - Then,
however, was Life dearer to me than all my Wisdom had ever been. -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
3.
One!
O man! Take heed!
Two!
What says deep midnight's voice indeed?
Three!
"I slept my sleep -
Four!
"From deepest dream I've woke and plead: -
Five!
"The world is deep,
Six!
"And deeper than the day could read.
Seven!
"Deep is its woe -
Eight!
"Joy - deeper still than grief can be:
Nine!
"Woe says: Hence! Go!
Ten!
"But joys all want eternity -
Eleven!
"Want deep profound eternity!"
Twelve!
179
Part 3, (16) THE SEVEN SEALS
(OR THE yes AND AMEN LAY.)
1.
IF I be a diviner and full of the divining spirit which wanders on high
mountain-ridges, between two seas,-
Wanders between the past and the future as a heavy cloud - hostile to
sultry plains, and to all that is weary and can neither die nor live:
Ready for lightning in its dark bosom, and for the redeeming flash of
light, charged with lightning which say Yes! which laugh Yes! ready for
divining flashes of lightning:-
-Blessed, however, is he who is thus charged! And truly, long must he
hang like a heavy tempest on the mountain, who shall one day kindle the
light of the future!-
Oh, how could I not be ardent for Eternity and for the marriage-ring of
rings - the ring of the return?
Never yet have I found the woman by whom I should like to have children,
unless it be this woman whom I love: for I love you, O Eternity!
For I love you, O Eternity!
2.
If ever my wrath has burst graves, shifted landmarks, or rolled old
shattered tables into precipitous depths:
If ever my scorn has scattered mouldered words to the winds, and if I
have come like a besom to cross-spiders, and as a cleansing wind to old
charnel-houses:
If ever I have sat rejoicing where old gods lie buried, world-blessing,
world-loving, beside the monuments of old world-maligners:-
-For even churches and gods'-graves do I love, if only heaven looks
through their ruined roofs with pure eyes; gladly do I sit like grass and
red poppies on ruined churches-
Oh, how could I not be ardent for Eternity, and for the marriage-ring of
rings - the ring of the return?
Never yet have I found the woman by whom I should like to have children,
unless it be this woman whom I love: for I love you, O Eternity!
For I love you, O Eternity!
3.
If ever a breath has come to me of the creative breath, and of the heavenly
necessity which compels even chances to dance star-dances:
If ever I have laughed with the laughter of the creative lightning, to
which the long thunder of the deed follows, grumblingly, but obediently:
180
If ever I have played dice with the gods at the divine table of the earth,
so that the earth quaked and ruptured, and snorted forth fire-streams:-
-For a divine table is the earth, and trembling with new active dictums
and dice-casts of the gods:
Oh, how could I not be ardent for Eternity, and for the marriage-ring of
rings - the ring of the return?
Never yet have I found the woman by whom I should like to have children,
unless it be this woman whom I love: for I love you, O Eternity!
For I love you, O Eternity!
4.
If ever I have drunk a full draught of the foaming spice - and
confection-bowl in which all things are well mixed:
If ever my hand has mingled the furthest with the nearest, fire with
spirit, joy with sorrow, and the harshest with the kindest:
If I myself am a grain of the saving salt which makes everything in the
confection-bowl mix well:-
-For there is a salt which units good with evil; and even the evilest is
worthy, as spicing and as final over-foaming:-
Oh, how could I not be ardent for Eternity, and for the marriage-ring of
rings - the ring of the return?
Never yet have I found the woman by whom I should like to have children,
unless it be this woman whom I love: for I love you, O Eternity!
For I love you, O Eternity!
5.
If I be fond of the sea, and all that is sea-like, and fondest of it when it
angrily contradicts me:
If the exploring delight be in me, which impels sails to the undiscovered,
if the seafarer's delight be in my delight:
If ever my rejoicing has called out: "The shore has vanished, - now has
fallen from me the last chain-
The boundless roars around me, far away sparkle for me space and
time, - well! cheer up! old heart!"-
Oh, how could I not be ardent for Eternity, and for the marriage-ring of
rings - the ring of the return?
Never yet have I found the woman by whom I should like to have children,
unless it be this woman whom I love: for I love you, O Eternity!
For I love you, O Eternity!
6.
If my virtue be a dancer's virtue, and if I have often sprung with both
feet into golden-emerald rapture:
181
If my wickedness be a laughing wickedness, at home among rosebanks
and hedges of lilies:
-or in laughter is all evil present, but it is sanctified and absolved by its
own bliss:-
And if it be my Alpha and Omega that everything heavy shall become
light, everybody a dancer, and every spirit a bird: and truly, that is my
Alpha and Omega!-
Oh, how could I not be ardent for Eternity, and for the marriage-ring of
rings - the ring of the return?
Never yet have I found the woman by whom I should like to have children,
unless it be this woman whom I love: for I love you, O Eternity!
For I love you, O Eternity!
7.
If ever I have spread out a tranquil heaven above me, and have flown
into my own heaven with my own pinions:
If I have swum playfully in profound luminous distances, and if my
freedom's avian wisdom has come to me:-
-Thus however speaks avian wisdom: - "Behold, there is no above and
no below! Throw yourself about, - outward, backward, you light one!
Sing! speak no more!
-Are not all words made for the heavy? Do not all words lie to the light
ones? Sing! speak no more!"-
Oh, how could I not be ardent for Eternity, and for the marriage-ring of
rings - the ring of the return?
Never yet have I found the woman by whom I should like to have children,
unless it be this woman whom I love: for I love you, O Eternity!
For I love you, O Eternity!
FOURTH AND LAST PART
Ah, where in the world have there been greater follies than with the pitiful?
And what in the world has caused more suffering than the follies
of the pitiful?
Woe to all loving ones who have not an elevation which is above their
pity!
Thus spoke the devil to me, once on a time: "Ever God has his hell: it is
his love for man."
And lately did I hear him say these words: "God is dead: of his pity for
man has God died." - ZARATHUSTRA, II., "The Pitiful."
182
Fourth Part
THUS SPOKE ZARATHUSTRA
FOURTH AND LAST PART
1. The Honey Sacrifice
2. The Cry Of Distress
3. Talk With The Kings
4. The Leech
5. The Magician
6. Out Of Service
7. The Ugliest Man
8. The Voluntary Beggar
9. The Shadow
10. Noontide
11. The Greeting
12. The Supper
13. The Higher Man
14. The Song Of Melancholy
15. Science
16. Among Daughters Of The Desert
17. The Awakening
18. The Ass-Festival
19. The Drunken Song
20. The Sign
Part 4, (1) THE HONEY SACRIFICE
-AND again passed moons and years over Zarathustra's soul, and he
heeded it not; his hair, however, became white. One day when he sat on
a stone in front of his cave, and gazed calmly into the distance - one there
gazes out on the sea, and away beyond sinuous abysses, - then went his
animals thoughtfully round about him, and at last set themselves in front
of him.
"O Zarathustra," said they, "gaze you out perhaps for your happiness?"
- "Of what account is my happiness!" answered he, "I have long ceased to
strive any more for happiness, I strive for my work." - "O Zarathustra,"
said the animals once more, "that say you as one who has overmuch of
good things. Lie you not in a sky-blue lake of happiness?" - "You wags,"
183
answered Zarathustra, and smiled, "how well did you choose the simile!
But you know also that my happiness is heavy, and not like a fluid wave
of water: it presses me and will not leave me, and is like molten pitch."-
Then went his animals again thoughtfully around him, and placed
themselves once more in front of him. "O Zarathustra," said they, "it is
consequently for that reason that you yourself always becomes more yellow
and darker, although your hair looks white and flaxen? Behold, you
sit in your pitch!" - "What do you say, my animals?" said Zarathustra,
laughing; "truly I reviled when I spoke of pitch. As it happens with me,
so is it with all fruits that turn ripe. It is the honey in my veins that
makes my blood thicker, and also my soul stiller." - "So will it be, O
Zarathustra," answered his animals, and pressed up to him; "but will you
not today ascend a high mountain? The air is pure, and today one sees
more of the world than ever." - "Yes, my animals," answered he, "you
counsel admirably and according to my heart: I will today ascend a high
mountain! But see that honey is there ready to hand, yellow, white,
good, ice-cool, golden-comb-honey. For know that when aloft I will
make the honey-sacrifice."-
When Zarathustra, however, was aloft on the summit, he sent his animals
home that had accompanied him, and found that he was now
alone: - then he laughed from the bottom of his heart, looked around
him, and spoke thus:
That I spoke of sacrifices and honey-sacrifices, it was merely a ruse in
talking and truly, a useful folly! Here aloft can I now speak freer than in
front of mountain-caves and anchorites' domestic animals.
What to sacrifice! I squander what is given me, a squanderer with a
thousand hands: how could I call that - sacrificing?
And when I desired honey I only desired bait, and sweet mucus and
mucilage, for which even the mouths of growling bears, and strange,
sulky, evil birds, water:
-The best bait, as huntsmen and fishermen require it. For if the world
be as a gloomy forest of animals, and a pleasure-ground for all wild
huntsmen, it seems to me rather - and preferably - a fathomless, rich sea;
-A sea full of many-hued fishes and crabs, for which even the gods
might long, and might be tempted to become fishers in it, and casters of
nets, - so rich is the world in wonderful things, great and small!
Especially the human world, the human sea: - towards it do I now
throw out my golden angle-rod and say: Open up, you human abyss!
Open up, and throw to me your fish and shining crabs! With my best
bait shall I allure to myself today the strangest human fish!
184
-My happiness itself do I throw out into all places far and wide
between orient, noontide, and occident, to see if many human fish will
not learn to hug and tug at my happiness;-
Until, biting at my sharp hidden hooks, they have to come up to my
height, the most motley abyss-groundlings, to the wickedest of all fishers
of men.
For this am I from the heart and from the beginning - drawing, hitherdrawing,
upward-drawing, upbringing; a drawer, a trainer, a trainingmaster,
who not in vain counselled himself once on a time: "Become
what you art!"
Thus may men now come up to me; for as yet do I await the signs that
it is time for my down-going; as yet do I not myself go down, as I must
do, among men.
Therefore do I here wait, crafty and scornful upon high mountains, no
impatient one, no patient one; rather one who has even unlearnt patience,
- because he no longer "suffers."
For my fate gives me time: it has forgotten me perhaps? Or does it sit
behind a big stone and catch flies?
And truly, I am well-disposed to my eternal fate, because it does not
hound and hurry me, but leaves me time for merriment and mischief; so
that I have to-day ascended this high mountain to catch fish.
Did ever anyone catch fish upon high mountains? And though it be a
folly what I here seek and do, it is better so than that down below I
should become solemn with waiting, and green and yellow-
-A posturing wrath-snorter with waiting, a holy howl-storm from the
mountains, an impatient one that shouts down into the valleys: "Listen,
else I will scourge you with the scourge of God!"
Not that I would have a grudge against such wrathful ones on that account:
they are well enough for laughter to me! Impatient must they now
be, those big alarm-drums, which find a voice now or never!
Myself, however, and my fate - we do not talk to the Present, neither
do we talk to the Never: for talking we have patience and time and more
than time. For one day must it yet come, and may not pass by.
What must one day come and may not pass by? Our great Hazar, that
is to say, our great, remote human-kingdom, the Zarathustra-kingdom of
a thousand years - -
How remote may such "remoteness" be? What does it concern me? But
on that account it is none the less sure to me-, with both feet stand I secure
on this ground;
-On an eternal ground, on hard primary rock, on this highest, hardest,
185
primary mountain-ridge, to which all winds come, as to the storm-parting,
asking Where? and Whence? and where?
Here laugh, laugh, my hearty, healthy wickedness! From high mountains
cast down your glittering scorn-laughter! Allure for me with your
glittering the finest human fish!
And whatever belongs to me in all seas, my in-and-for-me in all things
- fish that out for me, bring that up to me: for that do I wait, the wickedest
of all fish-catchers.
Out! out! my fishing-hook! In and down, you bait of my happiness!
Drip your sweetest dew, you honey of my heart! Bite, my fishing-hook,
into the belly of all black affliction!
Look out, look out, my eye! Oh, how many seas round about me, what
dawning human futures! And above me - what rosy red stillness! What
unclouded silence!
Part 4, (2) THE CRY OF DISTRESS
THE next day sat Zarathustra again on the stone in front of his cave,
whilst his animals roved about in the world outside to bring home new
food, - also new honey: for Zarathustra had spent and wasted the old
honey to the very last particle. When he thus sat, however, with a stick in
his hand, tracing the shadow of his figure on the earth, and reflecting -
truly! not upon himself and his shadow, - all at once he startled and
shrank back: for he saw another shadow beside his own. And when he
hastily looked around and stood up, behold, there stood the soothsayer
beside him, the same whom he had once given to eat and drink at his
table, the proclaimer of the great weariness, who taught: "All is alike,
nothing is worthwhile, the world is without meaning, knowledge
strangles." But his face had changed since then; and when Zarathustra
looked into his eyes, his heart was startled once more: so much evil announcement
and ashy-grey lightning passed over that countenance.
The soothsayer, who had perceived what went on in Zarathustra's soul,
wiped his face with his hand, as if he would wipe out the impression; the
same did also Zarathustra. And when both of them had thus silently
composed and strengthened themselves, they gave each other the hand,
as a token that they wanted once more to recognise each other.
"Welcome hither," said Zarathustra, "you soothsayer of the great
186
weariness, not in vain shall you once have been my messmate and guest.
Eat and drink also with me to-day, and forgive it that a cheerful old man
sits with you at table!" - "A cheerful old man?" answered the soothsayer,
shaking his head, "but whoever you art, or would be, O Zarathustra, you
have been here aloft the longest time, - in a little while your bark shall no
longer rest on dry land!" - "Do I then rest on dry land?" - asked Zarathustra,
laughing. - "The waves around your mountain," answered the soothsayer,
"rise and rise, the waves of great distress and affliction: they will
soon raise your bark also and carry you away." - Thereupon was
Zarathustra silent and wondered. - "Do you still hear nothing?" continued
the soothsayer: "does it not rush and roar out of the depth?" -
Zarathustra was silent once more and listened: then heard he a long,
long cry, which the abysses threw to one another and passed on; for
none of them wished to retain it: so evil did it sound.
"you ill announcer," said Zarathustra at last, "that is a cry of distress,
and the cry of a man; it may come perhaps out of a black sea. But what
does human distress matter to me! My last sin which has been reserved
for me, - know you what it is called?"
-"Pity!" answered the soothsayer from an overflowing heart, and raised
both his hands aloft - "O Zarathustra, I have come that I may seduce you
to your last sin!"-
And hardly had those words been uttered when there sounded the cry
once more, and longer and more alarming than before - also much nearer.
"You hear? You hear, O Zarathustra?" called out the soothsayer, "the
cry concerns you, it calls you: Come, come, come; it is time, it is the
highest time!"-
Zarathustra was silent thereupon, confused and staggered; at last he
asked, like one who hesitates in himself: "And who is it that there calls
me?"
"But you know it, certainly," answered the soothsayer warmly, "why
do you conceal yourself? It is the higher man that cries for you!"
"The higher man?" cried Zarathustra, horror-stricken: "what wants he?
What wants he? The higher man! What wants he here?" - and his skin
covered with perspiration.
The soothsayer, however, did not heed Zarathustra's alarm, but
listened and listened in the downward direction. When, however, it had
been still there for a long while, he looked behind, and saw Zarathustra
standing trembling.
"O Zarathustra," he began, with sorrowful voice, "you do not stand
there like one whose happiness makes him giddy: you will have to dance
187
lest you tumble down!
But although you should dance before me, and leap all your side-leaps,
no one may say to me: 'Behold, here dances the last joyous man!'
In vain would anyone come to this height who sought him here: caves
would he find, indeed, and back-caves, hiding-places for hidden ones;
but not lucky mines, nor treasure-chambers, nor new gold-veins of happiness.
Happiness - how indeed could one find happiness among such buriedalive
and solitary ones! Must I yet seek the last happiness on the Happy
Isles, and far away among forgotten seas?
But all is alike, nothing is worthwhile, no seeking is of service, there are
no longer any Happy Isles!" - -
Thus sighed the soothsayer; with his last sigh, however, Zarathustra
again became serene and assured, like one who has come out of a deep
chasm into the light. "No! No! Three times No!" exclaimed he with a
strong voice, and stroked his beard - "that do I know better! There are
still Happy Isles! Silence thereon, you sighing sorrow-sack!
Cease to splash thereon, you rain-cloud of the forenoon! Do I not
already stand here wet with your misery, and drenched like a dog?
Now do I shake myself and run away from you, that I may again become
dry: thereat may you not wonder! Do I seem to you discourteous?
Here however is my court.
But as regards the higher man: well! I shall seek him at once in those
forests: from thence came his cry. Perhaps he is there hard beset by an
evil beast.
He is in my domain: therein shall he receive no scathe! And truly, there
are many evil beasts about me."-
With those words Zarathustra turned around to depart. Then said the
soothsayer: "O Zarathustra, you are a rogue!
I know it well: you would rather be rid of me! Rather would you run
into the forest and lay snares for evil beasts!
But what good will it do you? In the evening will you have me again:
in your own cave will I sit, patient and heavy like a block - and wait for
you!"
"So be it!" shouted back Zarathustra, as he went away: "and what is my
in my cave belongs also to you, my guest!
Should you however find honey therein, well! Just lick it up, you
growling bear, and sweeten your soul! For in the evening we want both
to be in good spirits;
-In good spirits and joyful, because this day has come to an end! And
188
you yourself shall dance to my lays, as my dancing-bear.
You do not believe this? you shake your head? Well! Cheer up, old
bear! But I also - am a soothsayer."
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 4, (3) TALK WITH THE KINGS
1.
ERE Zarathustra had been an hour on his way in the mountains and
forests, he saw all at once a strange procession. Right on the path which
he was about to descend came two kings walking, bedecked with crowns
and purple girdles, and variegated like flamingos: they drove before
them a laden ass. "What do these kings want in my domain?" said
Zarathustra in astonishment to his heart, and hid himself hastily behind
a thicket. When however the kings approached to him, he said halfaloud,
like one speaking only to himself: "Strange! Strange! How does
this harmonise? Two kings do I see - and only one ass!"
Thereupon the two kings made a halt; they smiled and looked towards
the spot whence the voice proceeded, and afterwards looked into each
other's faces. "Such things do we also think among ourselves," said the
king on the right, "but we do not utter them."
The king on the left, however, shrugged his shoulders and answered:
"That may perhaps be a goat-herd. Or an hermit who has lived too long
among rocks and trees. For no society at all spoils also good manners."
"Good manners?" replied angrily and bitterly the other king: "what
then do we run out of the way of? Is it not 'good manners'? Our 'good society'?
Better, truly, to live among hermits and goat-herds, than with our gilded,
false, over-rouged populace - though it call itself 'good society.'
-Though it call itself 'nobility.' But there all is false and foul, above all
the blood - thanks to old evil diseases and worse curers.
The best and dearest to me at present is still a sound peasant, coarse,
artful, obstinate and enduring: that is at present the noblest type.
The peasant is at present the best; and the peasant type should be master!
But it is the kingdom of the populace - I no longer allow anything to
be imposed upon me. The populace, however - that means, hodgepodge.
Populace-hodgepodge: therein is everything mixed with everything,
189
saint and swindler, gentleman and Jew, and every beast out of Noah's
ark.
Good manners! Everything is false and foul with us. No one knows any
longer how to reverence: it is that precisely that we run away from. They
are fulsome obtrusive dogs; they gild palm-leaves.
This loathing chokes me, that we kings ourselves have become false,
draped and disguised with the old faded pomp of our ancestors, showpieces
for the stupidest, the craftiest, and whosoever at present traffics
for power.
We are not the first men - and have nevertheless to stand for them: of
this imposture have we at last become weary and disgusted.
From the rabble have we gone out of the way, from all those bawlers
and scribe-blowflies, from the trader-stench, the ambition-fidgeting, the
bad breath-: fie, to live among the rabble;
-Fie, to stand for the first men among the rabble! Ah, loathing! Loathing!
Loathing! What does it now matter about us kings!"-
"Your old sickness seizes you," said here the king on the left, "your
loathing seizes you, my poor brother. you know, however, that someone
hears us."
Immediately thereupon, Zarathustra, who had opened ears and eyes to
this talk, rose from his hiding-place, advanced towards the kings, and
thus began:
"He who hears to you, he who gladly hears to you, is called Zarathustra.
I am Zarathustra who once said: 'What does it now matter about kings!'
Forgive me; I rejoiced when you said to each other: 'What does it matter
about us kings!'
Here, however, is my domain and jurisdiction: what may you be seeking
in my domain? Perhaps, however, you have found on your way
what I seek: namely, the higher man."
When the kings heard this, they beat upon their breasts and said with
one voice: "We are recognised!
With the sword of your utterance severest you the thickest darkness of
our hearts. you have discovered our distress; for Behold. we are on our
way to find the higher man-
-The man that is higher than we, although we are kings. To him do we
convey this ass. For the highest man shall also be the highest lord on
earth.
There is no sorer misfortune in all human destiny, than when the
mighty of the earth are not also the first men. Then everything becomes
190
false and distorted and monstrous.
And when they are even the last men, and more beast than man, then
rises and rises the populace in honour, and at last says even the
populace-virtue: 'Behold, I alone am virtue!'"-
What have I just heard? answered Zarathustra. What wisdom in kings!
I am enchanted, and truly, I have already promptings to make a rhyme
thereon:-
-Even if it should happen to be a rhyme not suited for every one's ears.
I unlearned long ago to have consideration for long ears. Well then! Well
now!
(Here, however, it happened that the ass also found utterance: it said
distinctly and with malevolence, Y-E-A.)
'Twas once - methinks year one of our blessed Lord,-
Drunk without wine, the Sybil thus deplored:-
"How ill things go!
Decline! Decline! Ne'er sank the world so low!
Rome now has turned harlot and harlot-stew,
Rome's Caesar a beast, and God - has turned Jew!
2.
With those rhymes of Zarathustra the kings were delighted; the king
on the right, however, said: "O Zarathustra, how well it was that we set
out to see you!
For your enemies showed us your likeness in their mirror: there looked
you with the grimace of a devil, and sneeringly: so that we were afraid of
you.
But what good did it do! Always didst you prick us anew in heart and
ear with your sayings. Then did we say at last: What does it matter how
he look!
We must hear him; him who teaches: 'You shall love peace as a means
to new wars, and the short peace more than the long!'
No one ever spoke such warlike words: 'What is good? To be brave is
good. It is the good war that sanctifies every cause.'
O Zarathustra, our fathers' blood stirred in our veins at such words: it
was like the voice of spring to old wine-casks.
When the swords ran among one another like red-spotted serpents,
then did our fathers become fond of life; the sun of every peace seemed
to them languid and lukewarm, the long peace, however, made them
ashamed.
How they sighed, our fathers, when they saw on the wall brightly
furbished, dried-up swords! Like those they thirsted for war. For a
191
sword thirsts to drink blood, and sparkles with desire." - -
-When the kings thus discoursed and talked eagerly of the happiness of
their fathers, there came upon Zarathustra no little desire to mock at
their eagerness: for evidently they were very peaceable kings whom he
saw before him, kings with old and refined features. But he restrained
himself. "Well!" said he, "there leads the way, there lies the cave of
Zarathustra; and this day is to have a long evening! At present, however,
a cry of distress calls me hastily away from you.
It will honour my cave if kings want to sit and wait in it: but, to be
sure, you will have to wait long!
Well! What of that! Where does one at present learn better to wait than
at courts? And the whole virtue of kings that has remained to them - is it
not called to-day: Ability to wait?"
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 4, (4) THE LEECH
AND Zarathustra went thoughtfully on, further and lower down,
through forests and past moory bottoms; as it happens, however, to
everyone who meditates upon hard matters, he trod thereby unawares
upon a man. And behold, there spurted into his face all at once a cry of
pain, and two curses and twenty bad invectives, so that in his fright he
raised his stick and also struck the trodden one. Immediately afterwards,
however, he regained his composure, and his heart laughed at the folly
he had just committed.
"Pardon me," said he to the trodden one, who had got up enraged, and
had seated himself, "pardon me, and hear first of all a parable.
As a wanderer who dreams of remote things on a lonesome highway,
runs unawares against a sleeping dog, a dog which lies in the sun:
-As both of them then start up and snap at each other, like deadly enemies,
those two beings mortally frightened - so did it happen to us.
And yet! And yet - how little was lacking for them to caress each other,
that dog and that lonesome one! Are they not both - lonesome ones!"
-"Whoever you art," said the trodden one, still enraged, "you tread also
too close to me with your parable, and not only with your foot!
Behold. am I then a dog?" - And thereupon the sitting one got up, and
pulled his naked arm out of the swamp. For at first he had lain
192
outstretched on the ground, hidden and indiscernible, like those who lie
in wait for swamp-game.
"But whatever are you about!" called out Zarathustra in alarm, for he
saw a deal of blood streaming over the naked arm, - "what has hurt you?
has an evil beast bit you, you unfortunate one?"
The bleeding one laughed, still angry, "What matter is it to you!" said
he, and was about to go on. "Here am I at home and in my province. Let
him question me whoever will: to a dolt, however, I shall hardly answer."
"you are mistaken," said Zarathustra sympathetically, and held him
fast; "you are mistaken. Here you are not at home, but in my domain,
and therein shall no one receive any hurt.
Call me however what you wilt - I am who I must be. I call myself
Zarathustra.
Well! Up there is the way to Zarathustra's cave: it is not far, - will you
not attend to your wounds at my home?
It has gone badly with you, you unfortunate one, in this life: first a
beast bit you, and then - a man trod upon you!" - -
When however the trodden one had heard the name of Zarathustra he
was transformed. "What happens to me!" he exclaimed, "who preoccupies
me so much in this life as this one man, namely Zarathustra, and
that one animal that lives on blood, the leech?
For the sake of the leech did I lie here by this swamp, like a fisher, and
already had my outstretched arm been bitten ten times, when there bits a
still finer leech at my blood, Zarathustra himself!
O happiness! O miracle! Praised be this day which enticed me into the
swamp! Praised be the best, the most live cupping-glass, that at present
lives; praised be the great conscience-leech Zarathustra!"-
Thus spoke the trodden one, and Zarathustra rejoiced at his words and
their refined reverential style. "Who are you?" asked he, and gave him
his hand, "there is much to clear up and elucidate between us, but
already methinks pure clear day is dawning."
"I am the spiritually conscientious one," answered he who was asked,
"and in matters of the spirit it is difficult for anyone to take it more rigorously,
more restrictedly, and more severely than I, except him from
whom I learnt it, Zarathustra himself.
Better know nothing than half-know many things! Better be a fool on
one's own account, than a sage on other people's approbation! I - go to
the basis:
-What matter if it be great or small? If it be called swamp or sky? A
193
handbreadth of basis is enough for me, if it be actually basis and ground!
-A handbreadth of basis: thereon can one stand. In the true knowingknowledge
there is nothing great and nothing small."
"Then you are perhaps an expert on the leech?" asked Zarathustra; "and
you investigate the leech to its ultimate basis, you conscientious one?"
"O Zarathustra," answered the trodden one, "that would be something
immense; how could I presume to do so!
That, however, of which I am master and knower, is the brain of the
leech: - that is my world!
And it is also a world! Forgive it, however, that my pride here finds expression,
for here I have not my equal. Therefore said I: 'here am I at
home.'
How long have I investigated this one thing, the brain of the leech, so
that here the slippery truth might no longer slip from me! Here is my
domain!
-For the sake of this did I cast everything else aside, for the sake of this
did everything else become indifferent to me; and close beside my knowledge
lies my black ignorance.
My spiritual conscience requires from me that it should be so - that I
should know one thing, and not know all else: they are a loathing to me,
all the semi-spiritual, all the hazy, hovering, and visionary.
Where my honesty ceases, there am I blind, and want also to be blind.
Where I want to know, however, there want I also to be honest - namely,
severe, rigorous, restricted, cruel and inexorable.
Because you once said, O Zarathustra: 'Spirit is life which itself cuts into
life'; - that led and allured me to your doctrine. And truly, with my
own blood have I increased my own knowledge!"
-"As the evidence indicates," broke in Zarathustra; for still was the
blood flowing down on the naked arm of the conscientious one. For
there had ten leeches bitten into it.
"O you strange fellow, how much does this very evidence teach me -
namely, you yourself! And not all, perhaps, might I pour into your rigorous
ear!
Well then! We part here! But I would rather find you again. Up there is
the way to my cave: to-night shall you there by my welcome guest!
Rather would I also make amends to your body for Zarathustra treading
upon you with his feet: I think about that. Just now, however, a cry
of distress calls me hastily away from you."
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
194
Part 4, (5) THE MAGICIAN
1.
WHEN however Zarathustra had gone round a rock, then saw he on
the same path, not far below him, a man who threw his limbs about like
a maniac, and at last tumbled to the ground on his belly. "Halt!" said
then Zarathustra to his heart, "he there must surely be the higher man,
from him came that dreadful cry of distress, - I will see if I can help him."
When, however, he ran to the spot where the man lay on the ground, he
found a trembling old man with fixed eyes; and in spite of all
Zarathustra's efforts to lift him and set him again on his feet, it was all in
vain. The unfortunate one, also, did not seem to notice that someone was
beside him; on the contrary, he continually looked around with moving
gestures, like one forsaken and isolated from all the world. At last,
however, after much trembling, and convulsion, and curling-himself-up,
he began to lament thus:
Who warm'th me, who lov'th me still?
Give ardent fingers!
Give heartening charcoal-warmers!
Prone, outstretched, trembling,
Like him, half dead and cold, whose feet one warm'th-
And shaken, ah! by unfamiliar fevers,
Shivering with sharpened, icy-cold frost-arrows,
By you pursued, my fancy!
Indescribable! Recondite! Sore-frightening!
You huntsman 'hind the cloud-banks!
Now lightning-struck by you,
You mocking eye that me in darkness watches:
-Thus do I lie,
Bend myself, twist myself, convulsed
With all eternal torture,
And smitten
By you, cruellest huntsman,
You unfamiliar - God
Smite deeper!
Smite yet once more!
195
Pierce through and rend my heart!
What mean'th this torture
With dull, indented arrows?
Why look'st you hither,
Of human pain not weary,
With mischief-loving, godly flash-glances?
Not murder will you,
But torture, torture?
For why - me torture,
You mischief-loving, unfamiliar God? -
Ha! Ha!
You steal close
In midnight's gloomy hour?
What will you?
Speak!
You crowd me, pressest-
Ha! now far too closely!
You hear me breathing,
You overhear my heart,
You ever jealous one!
-Of what, pray, ever jealous?
Off! Off!
For why the ladder?
Would you get in?
To heart in-clamber?
To my own most secret
Conceptions in-clamber?
Shameless one! you unknown one! - Thief!
What seek you by your stealing?
What seek you by your hearkening?
What seek you by your torturing?
You torturer!
You - hangman-God!
Or shall I, as the mastiffs do,
Roll me before you?
And cringing, enraptured, frantical,
My tail friendly - waggle!
In vain!
Goad further!
Cruellest goader!
196
No dog - your game just am I,
Cruellest huntsman!
Your proudest of captives,
You robber 'hind the cloud-banks
Speak finally!
You lightning-veiled one! you unknown one! Speak!
What will you, highway-ambusher, from - me?
What will you, unfamiliar - God?
What?
Ransom-gold?
How much of ransom-gold?
Solicit much - that bids my pride!
And be concise - that bids my other pride!
Ha! Ha!
Me - want you? me?
-Entire?
Ha! Ha!
And torture me, fool that you art,
Dead-torture quite my pride?
Give love to me - who warms me still?
Who loves me still?-
Give ardent fingers
Give heartening charcoal-warmers,
Give me, the lonesomest,
The ice (ah! seven-fold frozen ice
For very enemies,
For foes, does make one thirst).
Give, yield to me,
Cruellest foe,
-Yourself! - -
Away!
There fled he surely,
My final, only comrade,
My greatest foe,
My unfamiliar-
My hangman-God!
-No!
Come you back!
With all of your great tortures!
To me the last of lonesome ones,
197
Oh, come you back!
All my hot tears in streamlets trickle
Their course to you!
And all my final hearty fervour-
Up-glows to you!
Oh, come you back,
My unfamiliar God! my pain!
My final bliss!
2.
-Here, however, Zarathustra could no longer restrain himself; he took
his staff and struck the wailer with all his might. "Stop this," cried he to
him with wrathful laughter, "stop this, you stage-player! you false coiner!
you liar from the very heart! I know you well!
I will soon make warm legs to you, you evil magician: I know well how
- to make it hot for such as you!"
-"Leave off," said the old man, and sprang up from the ground, "strike
me no more, O Zarathustra! I did it only for amusement!
That kind of thing belongs to my art. you yourself, I wanted to put to
the proof when I gave this performance. And truly, you have well detected
me!
But you yourself - have given me no small proof of yourself: you are
hard, you wise Zarathustra! Hard strike you with your 'truths,' your
cudgel forces from me - this truth!"
-"Flatter not," answered Zarathustra, still excited and frowning, "you
stage-player from the heart! you are false: why speak you - of truth!
You peacock of peacocks, you sea of vanity; what didst you represent
before me, you evil magician; whom was I meant to believe in when you
wailed in such wise?"
"The penitent in spirit," said the old man, "it was him - I represented;
you yourself once devised this expression-
-The poet and magician who at last turns his spirit against himself, the
transformed one who freezes to death by his bad science and conscience.
And just acknowledge it: it was long, O Zarathustra, before you discovered
my trick and lie! you believed in my distress when you held my
head with both your hands,-
-I heard you lament 'we have loved him too little, loved him too little!'
Because I so far deceived you, my wickedness rejoiced in me."
"you may have deceived subtler ones than I," said Zarathustra sternly.
"I am not on my guard against deceivers; I have to be without precaution:
so wills my lot.
198
You, however, - must deceive: so far do I know your! You must ever be
equivocal, trivocal, quadrivocal, and quinquivocal! Even what you have
now confessed, is not nearly true enough nor false enough for me!
You bad false coiner, how could you do otherwise! your very malady
would you whitewash if you showed yourself naked to your physician.
Thus didst you whitewash your lie before me when you said: 'I did so
only for amusement!' There was also seriousness therein, you are
something of a penitent-in-spirit!
I divine you well: you have become the enchanter of all the world; but
for yourself you have no lie or artifice left, - you are disenchanted to
yourself!
You have reaped disgust as your one truth. No word in you is any
longer genuine, but your mouth is so: that is to say, the disgust that
cleaves to your mouth." - -
-"Who are you at all!" cried here the old magician with defiant voice,
"who dares to speak thus to me, the greatest man now living?" - and a
green flash shot from his eye at Zarathustra. But immediately after he
changed, and said sadly:
"O Zarathustra, I am weary of it, I am disgusted with my arts, I am not
great, why do I dissemble! But you know it well - I sought for greatness!
A great man I wanted to appear, and persuaded many; but the lie has
been beyond my power. On it do I collapse.
O Zarathustra, everything is a lie in me; but that I collapse - this my
collapsing is genuine!"-
"It honours you," said Zarathustra gloomily, looking down with sidelong
glance, "it honours you that you sought for greatness, but it betrays
you also. you are not great.
You bad old magician, that is the best and the most honest thing I honour
in you, that you have become weary of yourself, and have expressed
it: 'I am not great.'
Therein do I honour you as a penitent-in-spirit, and although only for
the twinkling of an eye, in that one moment were you - genuine.
But tell me, what seek you here in my forests and rocks? And if you
have put yourself in my way, what proof of me would you have?-
-Wherein didst you put me to the test?"
Thus spoke Zarathustra, and his eyes sparkled. But the old magician
kept silence for a while; then said he: "Did I put you to the test? I - seek
only.
O Zarathustra, I seek a genuine one, a right one, a simple one, an unequivocal
one, a man of perfect honesty, a vessel of wisdom, a saint of
199
knowledge, a great man!
Know you it not, O Zarathustra? I seek Zarathustra."
-And here there arose a long silence between them: Zarathustra,
however, became profoundly absorbed in thought, so that he shut his
eyes. But afterwards coming back to the situation, he grasped the hand
of the magician, and said, full of politeness and policy:
"Well! Up there leads the way, there is the cave of Zarathustra. In it
may you seek him whom you would rather find.
And ask counsel of my animals, my eagle and my serpent: they shall
help you to seek. My cave however is large.
I myself, to be sure - I have as yet seen no great man. That which is
great, the acutest eye is at present insensible to it. It is the kingdom of the
populace.
Many a one have I found who stretched and inflated himself, and the
people cried: 'Behold; a great man!' But what good do all bellows do! The
wind comes out at last.
At last bursts the frog which has inflated itself too long: then comes out
the wind. To prick a swollen one in the belly, I call good pastime. Hear
that, you boys!
Our today is of the popular: who still knows what is great and what is
small! Who could there seek successfully for greatness! A fool only: it
succeeds with fools.
You seek for great men, you strange fool? Who taught that to you? Is
today the time for it? Oh, you bad seeker, why do you - tempt me?" - -
Thus spoke Zarathustra, comforted in his heart, and went laughing on
his way.
Part 4, (6) OUT OF SERVICE
NOT long, however, after Zarathustra had freed himself from the magician,
he again saw a person sitting beside the path which he followed,
namely a tall, black man, with a haggard, pale countenance: this man
grieved him exceedingly. "Alas," said he to his heart, "there sits disguised
affliction; methinks he is of the type of the priests: what do they want in
my domain?
What! Hardly have I escaped from that magician, and must another
necromancer again run across my path,-
200
-Some sorcerer with laying-on-of-hands, some sombre wonder-worker
by the grace of God, some anointed world-maligner, whom, may the
devil take!
But the devil is never at the place which would be his right place: he always
comes too late, that cursed dwarf and club-foot!"-
Thus cursed Zarathustra impatiently in his heart, and considered how
with averted look he might slip past the black man. But behold, it came
about otherwise. For at the same moment had the sitting one already
perceived him; and not unlike one whom an unexpected happiness overtakes,
he sprang to his feet, and went straight towards Zarathustra.
"Whoever you art, you traveller," said he, "help a strayed one, a seeker,
an old man, who may here easily come to grief!
The world here is strange to me, and remote; wild beasts also did I hear
howling; and he who could have given me protection - he is himself no
more.
I was seeking the pious man, a saint and an anchorite, who, alone in his
forest, had not yet heard of what all the world knows at present."
"What does all the world know at present?" asked Zarathustra.
"Perhaps that the old God no longer lives, in whom all the world once
believed?"
"you say it," answered the old man sorrowfully. "And I served that old
God until his last hour.
Now, however, am I out of service, without master, and yet not free;
likewise am I no longer merry even for an hour, except it be in recollections.
Therefore did I ascend into these mountains, that I might finally have a
festival for myself once more, as becomes an old pope and church-father:
for know it, that I am the last pope! - a festival of pious recollections and
divine services.
Now, however, is he himself dead, the most pious of men, the saint in
the forest, who praised his God constantly with singing and mumbling.
He himself found I no longer when I found his cot - but two wolves
found I therein, which howled on account of his death, - for all animals
loved him. Then did I haste away.
Had I thus come in vain into these forests and mountains? Then did
my heart determine that I should seek another, the most pious of all
those who believe not in God-, my heart determined that I should seek
Zarathustra!"
Thus spoke the hoary man, and gazed with keen eyes at him who
stood before him. Zarathustra however seized the hand of the old pope
201
and regarded it a long while with admiration.
"Behold. you venerable one," said he then, "what a fine and long hand!
That is the hand of one who has ever dispensed blessings. Now,
however, does it hold fast him whom you seek, me, Zarathustra.
It is I, the ungodly Zarathustra, who says: 'Who is ungodlier than I,
that I may enjoy his teaching?'"-
Thus spoke Zarathustra, and penetrated with his glances the thoughts
and arrear-thoughts of the old pope. At last the latter began:
"He who most loved and possessed him has now also lost him most-:
-Behold, I myself am surely the most godless of us at present? But who
could rejoice at that!"-
-"you served him to the last?" asked Zarathustra thoughtfully, after a
deep silence, "you know how he died? Is it true what they say, that sympathy
choked him;
-That he saw how man hung on the cross, and could not endure it; -
that his love to man became his hell, and at last his death?" - -
The old pope however did not answer, but looked aside timidly, with a
painful and gloomy expression.
"Let him go," said Zarathustra, after prolonged meditation, still looking
the old man straight in the eye.
"Let him go, he is gone. And though it honours you that you speak
only in praise of this dead one, yet you know as well as I who he was,
and that he went curious ways."
"To speak before three eyes," said the old pope cheerfully (he was blind
of one eye), "in divine matters I am more enlightened than Zarathustra
himself - and may well be so.
My love served him long years, my will followed all his will. A good
servant, however, knows everything, and many a thing even which a
master hides from himself.
He was a hidden God, full of secrecy. Truly, he did not come by his son
otherwise than by secret ways. At the door of his faith stands adultery.
Whoever extols him as a God of love, does not think highly enough of
love itself. Did not that God want also to be judge? But the loving one
loves irrespective of reward and requital.
When he was young, that God out of the Orient, then was he harsh and
revengeful, and built himself a hell for the delight of his favourites.
At last, however, he became old and soft and mellow and pitiful, more
like a grandfather than a father, but most like a tottering old grandmother.
There did he sit shrivelled in his chimney-corner, fretting on account of
202
his weak legs, world-weary, will-weary, and one day he suffocated of his
all-too-great pity." - -
"you old pope," said here Zarathustra interposing, "have you seen that
with your eyes? It could well have happened in that way: in that way,
and also otherwise. When gods die they always die many kinds of death.
Well! At all events, one way or other - he is gone! He was counter to
the taste of my ears and eyes; worse than that I should not like to say
against him.
I love everything that looks bright and speaks honestly. But he - you
know it, indeed, you old priest, there was something of your type in him,
the priest-type - he was equivocal.
He was also indistinct. How he raged at us, this wrath-snorter, because
we understood him badly! But why did he not speak more clearly?
And if the fault lay in our ears, why did he give us ears that heard him
badly? If there was dirt in our ears, well! who put it in them?
Too much miscarried with him, this potter who had not learned thoroughly!
That he took revenge on his pots and creations, however, because
they turned out badly - that was a sin against good taste.
There is also good taste in piety: this at last said: 'Away with such a
God! Better to have no God, better to set up destiny on one's own account,
better to be a fool, better to be God oneself!'"
-"What do I hear!" said then the old pope, with intent ears; "O
Zarathustra, you are more pious than you believe, with such an unbelief!
Some god in you has converted you to your ungodliness.
Is it not your piety itself which no longer lets you believe in a God?
And your over-great honesty will yet lead you even beyond good and
evil!
Behold, what has been reserved for you? you have eyes and hands and
mouth, which have been predestined for blessing from eternity. One
does not bless with the hand alone.
Nigh to you, though you profess to be the ungodliest one, I feel a hale
and holy odour of long benedictions: I feel glad and grieved thereby.
Let me be your guest, O Zarathustra, for a single night! Nowhere on
earth shall I now feel better than with you!"-
"Amen! So shall it be!" said Zarathustra, with great astonishment; "up
there leads the way, there lies the cave of Zarathustra.
Gladly, indeed, would I conduct you there myself, you venerable one;
for I love all pious men. But now a cry of distress calls me hastily away
from you.
In my domain shall no one come to grief; my cave is a good haven.
203
And best of all would I like to put every sorrowful one again on firm
land and firm legs.
Who, however, could take your melancholy off your shoulders? For
that I am too weak. Long, truly, should we have to wait until someone
re-awoke your God for you.
For that old God lives no more: he is indeed dead." -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 4, (7) THE UGLIEST MAN
-AND again did Zarathustra's feet run through mountains and forests,
and his eyes sought and sought, but nowhere was he to be seen whom
they wanted to see - the sorely distressed sufferer and crier. On the
whole way, however, he rejoiced in his heart and was full of gratitude.
"What good things," said he, "has this day given me, as amends for its
bad beginning! What strange interlocutors have I found!
At their words will I now chew a long while as at good corn; small
shall my teeth grind and crush them, until they flow like milk into my
soul!"-
When, however, the path again curved round a rock, all at once the
landscape changed, and Zarathustra entered into a realm of death. Here
bristled aloft black and red cliffs, without any grass, tree, or bird's voice.
For it was a valley which all animals avoided, even the beasts of prey, except
that a species of ugly, thick, green serpent came here to die when
they became old. Therefore the shepherds called this valley: "Serpentdeath."
Zarathustra, however, became absorbed in dark recollections, for it
seemed to him as if he had once before stood in this valley. And much
heaviness settled on his mind, so that he walked slowly and always more
slowly, and at last stood still. Then, however, when he opened his eyes,
he saw something sitting by the wayside shaped like a man, and hardly
like a man, something nondescript. And all at once there came over
Zarathustra a great shame, because he had gazed on such a thing. Blushing
up to the very roots of his white hair, he turned aside his glance, and
raised his foot that he might leave this ill-starred place. Then, however,
became the dead wilderness vocal: for from the ground a noise welled
up, gurgling and rattling, as water gurgles and rattles at night through
204
stopped-up water-pipes; and at last it turned into human voice and human
speech: - it sounded thus:
"Zarathustra! Zarathustra! Read my riddle! Say, say! What is the revenge
on the witness?
I entice you back; here is smooth ice! See to it, see to it, that your pride
does not here break its legs!
You think yourself wise, you proud Zarathustra! Read then the riddle,
you hard nut-cracker, - the riddle that I am! Say then: who am I!"
-When however Zarathustra had heard these words, - what think you
then took place in his soul? Pity overcame him; and he sank down all at
once, like an oak that has long withstood many tree-fellers, - heavily,
suddenly, to the terror even of those who meant to fell it. But immediately
he got up again from the ground, and his countenance became
stern.
"I know you well," said he, with a brazen voice, "you are the murderer
of God! Let me go.
You could not endure him who beheld you, - who ever beheld you
through and through, you ugliest man. you took revenge on this witness!"
Thus spoke Zarathustra and was about to go; but the nondescript
grasped at a corner of his garment and began anew to gurgle and seek
for words. "Stay," said he at last-
-"Stay! Do not pass by! I have divined what axe it was that struck you
to the ground: hail to you, O Zarathustra, that you are again upon your
feet!
You have divined, I know it well, how the man feels who killed him, -
the murderer of God. Stay! Sit down here beside me; it is not to no purpose.
To whom would I go but to you? Stay, sit down! Do not however look
at me! Honour thus - my ugliness!
They persecute me: now are you my last refuge. Not with their hatred,
not with their bailiffs; - Oh, such persecution would I mock at, and be
proud and cheerful!
has not all success thus far been with the well-persecuted ones? And he
who persecutes well learns readily to be obsequent - when once he is -
put behind! But it is their pity-
-Their pity is it from which I flee away and flee to you. O Zarathustra,
protect me, you, my last refuge, you sole one who divined me:
-you have divined how the man feels who killed him. Stay! And if you
will go, you impatient one, go not the way that I came. That way is bad.
205
Are you angry with me because I have already racked language too
long? Because I have already counselled you? But know that it is I, the
ugliest man,
-Who have also the largest, heaviest feet. Where I have gone, the way is
bad. I tread all paths to death and destruction.
But that you passed me by in silence, that you blushed - I saw it well:
thereby did I know you as Zarathustra.
Every one else would have thrown to me his alms, his pity, in look and
speech. But for that - I am not beggar enough: that didst you divine.
For that I am too rich, rich in what is great, frightful, ugliest, most unutterable!
your shame, O Zarathustra, honoured me!
With difficulty did I get out of the crowd of the pitiful, - that I might
find the only one who at present teaches that 'pity is obtrusive' - yourself,
O Zarathustra!
-Whether it be the pity of a God, or whether it be human pity, it is offensive
to modesty. And unwillingness to help may be nobler than the
virtue that rushes to do so.
That however - namely, pity - is called virtue itself at present by all
petty people: - they have no reverence for great misfortune, great ugliness,
great failure.
Beyond all these do I look, as a dog looks over the backs of thronging
flocks of sheep. They are petty, good-wooled, good-willed, grey people.
As the heron looks contemptuously at shallow pools, with backwardbent
head, so do I look at the throng of grey little waves and wills and
souls.
Too long have we acknowledged them to be right, those petty people:
so we have at last given them power as well; - and now do they teach
that 'good is only what petty people call good.'
And 'truth' is at present what the preacher spoke who himself sprang
from them, that singular saint and advocate of the petty people, who
testified of himself: 'I - am the truth.'
That immodest one has long made the petty people greatly puffed up, -
he who taught no small error when he taught: 'I - am the truth.'
has an immodest one ever been answered more courteously? - You,
however, O Zarathustra, passed him by, and said: 'No! No! Three times
No!'
You warned against his error; you warned - the first to do so - against
pity: - not every one, not none, but yourself and your type.
You are ashamed of the shame of the great sufferer; and truly when
you say: 'From pity there comes a heavy cloud; take heed, you men!'
206
-When you teach: 'All creators are hard, all great love is beyond their
pity:' O Zarathustra, how well versed do you seem to me in weathersigns!
You yourself, however, - warn yourself also against your pity! For
many are on their way to you, many suffering, doubting, despairing,
drowning, freezing ones-
I warn you also against myself. you have read my best, my worst
riddle, myself, and what I have done. I know the axe that fells you.
But he - had to die: he looked with eyes which beheld everything, - he
beheld men's depths and dregs, all his hidden ignominy and ugliness.
His pity knew no modesty: he crept into my dirtiest corners. This most
prying, over-intrusive, over-pitiful one had to die.
He ever beheld me: on such a witness I would have revenge - or not
live myself.
The God who beheld everything, and also man: that God had to die!
Man cannot endure it that such a witness should live."
Thus spoke the ugliest man. Zarathustra however got up, and prepared
to go on: for he felt frozen to the very bowels.
"you nondescript," said he, "you warned me against your path. As
thanks for it I praise my to you. Behold, up there is the cave of Zarathustra.
My cave is large and deep and has many corners; there finds he that is
most hidden his hiding-place. And close beside it, there are a hundred
lurking-places and by-places for creeping, fluttering, and hopping
creatures.
You outcast, who have cast yourself out, you will not live among men
and men's pity? Well then, do like me! Thus will you learn also from me;
only the doer learns.
And talk first and foremost to my animals! The proudest animal and
the wisest animal - they might well be the right counsellors for us both!"
- -
Thus spoke Zarathustra and went his way, more thoughtfully and
slowly even than before: for he asked himself many things, and hardly
knew what to answer.
"How poor indeed is man," thought he in his heart, "how ugly, how
wheezy, how full of hidden shame!
They tell me that man loves himself. Ah, how great must that self-love
be! How much contempt is opposed to it!
Even this man has loved himself, as he has despised himself, - a great
lover methinks he is, and a great despiser.
207
No one have I yet found who more thoroughly despised himself: even
that is elevation. Alas, was this perhaps the higher man whose cry I
heard?
I love the great despisers. Man is something that has to be surpassed." -
-
Part 4, (8) THE VOLUNTARY BEGGAR
WHEN Zarathustra had left the ugliest man, he was chilled and felt
lonesome: for much coldness and lonesomeness came over his spirit, so
that even his limbs became colder thereby. When, however, he wandered
on and on, uphill and down, at times past green meadows, though also
sometimes over wild stony couches where formerly perhaps an impatient
brook had made its bed, then he turned all at once warmer and
heartier again.
"What has happened to me?" he asked himself, "something warm and
living quickens me; it must be in the neighbourhood.
Already am I less alone; unconscious companions and brothers rove
around me; their warm breath touches my soul."
When, however, he spied about and sought for the comforters of his
lonesomeness, behold, there were cows there standing together on an
eminence, whose proximity and smell had warmed his heart. The cows,
however, seemed to listen eagerly to a speaker, and took no heed of him
who approached. When, however, Zarathustra was quite close to them,
then did he hear plainly that a human voice spoke in the midst of the
cows, and apparently all of them had turned their heads towards the
speaker.
Then ran Zarathustra up speedily and drove the animals aside; for he
feared that someone had here met with harm, which the pity of the cows
would hardly be able to relieve. But in this he was deceived; for behold,
there sat a man on the ground who seemed to be persuading the animals
to have no fear of him, a peaceable man and Preacher-on-the-Mount, out
of whose eyes kindness itself preached. "What do you seek here?" called
out Zarathustra in astonishment.
"What do I here seek?" answered he: "the same that you seek, you
mischief-maker; that is to say, happiness upon earth.
To that end, however, I would rather learn of these cows. For I tell you
208
that I have already talked half a morning to them, and just now were
they about to give me their answer. Why do you disturb them?
Except we be converted and become as cows, we shall in no wise enter
into the kingdom of heaven. For we ought to learn from them one thing:
ruminating.
And truly, although a man should gain the whole world, and yet not
learn one thing, ruminating, what would it profit him! He would not be
rid of his affliction,
-His great affliction: that, however, is at present called disgust. Who
has not at present his heart, his mouth and his eyes full of disgust? you
also! you also! But behold these cows!"-
Thus spoke the Preacher-on-the-Mount, and turned then his own look
towards Zarathustra - for thus far it had rested lovingly on the cows-:
then, however, he put on a different expression. "Who is this with whom
I talk?" he exclaimed, frightened, and sprang up from the ground.
"This is the man without disgust, this is Zarathustra himself, the surmounter
of the great disgust, this is the eye, this is the mouth, this is the
heart of Zarathustra himself."
And whilst he thus spoke he kissed with overflowing eyes the hands of
him with whom he spoke, and behaved altogether like one to whom a
precious gift and jewel has fallen unawares from heaven. The cows,
however, gazed at it all and wondered.
"Speak not of me, you strange one; you amiable one!" said Zarathustra,
and restrained his affection, "speak to me firstly of yourself! are you not
the voluntary beggar who once cast away great riches,-
-Who was ashamed of his riches and of the rich, and fled to the poorest
to bestow upon them his abundance and his heart? But they received
him not."
"But they received me not," said the voluntary beggar, "you know it, indeed.
So I went at last to the animals and to those cows."
"Then learned you," interrupted Zarathustra, "how much harder it is to
give properly than to take properly, and that bestowing well is an art -
the last, subtlest master-art of kindness.
"Especially nowadays," answered the voluntary beggar: "at present,
that is to say, when everything low has become rebellious and exclusive
and haughty in its manner - in the manner of the populace.
For the hour has come, you know it indeed, for the great, evil, long,
slow mob-and-slave-insurrection: it extends and extends!
Now does it provoke the lower classes, all benevolence and petty giving;
and the overrich may be on their guard!
209
Whoever at present drip, like bulgy bottles out of all-too-small necks: -
of such bottles at present one willingly breaks the necks.
Wanton avidity, bilious envy, careworn revenge, populace-pride: all
these struck my eye. It is no longer true that the poor are blessed. The
kingdom of heaven, however, is with the cows."
"And why is it not with the rich?" asked Zarathustra temptingly, while
he kept back the cows which sniffed familiarly at the peaceful one.
"Why do you tempt me?" answered the other. "you know it yourself
better even than I. What was it drove me to the poorest, O Zarathustra?
Was it not my disgust at the richest?
-At the culprits of riches, with cold eyes and rank thoughts, who pick
up profit out of all kinds of rubbish - at this rabble that stinks to heaven,
-At this gilded, falsified populace, whose fathers were pickpockets, or
carrion-crows, or rag-pickers, with wives compliant, lewd and forgetful:
- for they are all of them not far different from harlots-
Populace above, populace below! What are 'poor' and 'rich' at present!
That distinction did I unlearn, - then did I flee away further and ever further,
until I came to those cows."
Thus spoke the peaceful one, and puffed himself and perspired with
his words: so that the cows wondered anew. Zarathustra, however, kept
looking into his face with a smile, all the time the man talked so severely
- and shook silently his head.
"you do violence to yourself, you Preacher-on-the-Mount, when you
use such severe words. For such severity neither your mouth nor your
eye have been given you.
Nor, methinks, has your stomach either: to it all such rage and hatred
and foaming-over is repugnant. your stomach wants softer things: you
are not a butcher.
Rather seem you to me a plant-eater and a root-man. Perhaps you
grind corn. Certainly, however, you are averse to fleshly joys, and you
love honey."
"you have divined me well," answered the voluntary beggar, with
lightened heart. "I love honey, I also grind corn; for I have sought out
what tastes sweetly and makes pure breath:
-Also what requires a long time, a day's-work and a mouth's-work for
gentle idlers and sluggards.
Furthest, to be sure, have those cows carried it: they have devised ruminating
and lying in the sun. They also abstain from all heavy thoughts
which inflate the heart."
-"Well!" said Zarathustra, "you should also see my animals, my eagle
210
and my serpent, - their like do not at present exist on earth.
Behold, there leads the way to my cave: be tonight its guest. And talk
to my animals of the happiness of animals,-
-Until I myself come home. For now a cry of distress calls me hastily
away from you. Also, should you find new honey with me, ice-cold,
golden-comb-honey, eat it!
Now, however, take leave at once of your cows, you strange one! you
amiable one! though it be hard for you. For they are your warmest
friends and preceptors!"-
-"One excepted, whom I hold still dearer," answered the voluntary beggar.
"you yourself are good, O Zarathustra, and better even than a cow!"
"Away, away with your! You evil flatterer!" cried Zarathustra mischievously,
"why do you spoil me with such praise and flattery- honey?
"Away, away from me!" cried he once more, and heaved his stick at the
fond beggar, who, however, ran nimbly away.
Part 4, (9) THE SHADOW
SCARCELY however was the voluntary beggar gone in haste, and
Zarathustra again alone, when he heard behind him a new voice which
called out: "Stay! Zarathustra! Do wait! It is myself, indeed, O Zarathustra,
myself, your shadow!" But Zarathustra did not wait; for a sudden irritation
came over him on account of the crowd and the crowding in his
mountains. "where has my lonesomeness gone?" spoke he.
"It is truly becoming too much for me; these mountains swarm; my
kingdom is no longer of this world; I require new mountains.
My shadow calls me? What matter about my shadow! Let it run after
me! I - run away from it."
Thus spoke Zarathustra to his heart and ran away. But the one behind
followed after him, so that immediately there were three runners, one
after the other - namely, foremost the voluntary beggar, then Zarathustra,
and thirdly, and hindmost, his shadow. But not long had they run
thus when Zarathustra became conscious of his folly, and shook off with
one jerk all his irritation and detestation.
"What!" said he, "have not the most ludicrous things always happened
to us old hermits and saints?
Truly, my folly has grown big in the mountains! Now do I hear six old
211
fools' legs rattling behind one another!
But does Zarathustra need to be frightened by his shadow? Also, methinks
that after all it has longer legs thin mine."
Thus spoke Zarathustra, and, laughing with eyes and entrails, he stood
still and turned round quickly - and behold, he almost thereby threw his
shadow and follower to the ground, so closely had the latter followed at
his heels, and so weak was he. For when Zarathustra scrutinised him
with his glance he was frightened as by a sudden apparition, so slender,
swarthy, hollow and worn-out did this follower appear.
"Who are you?" asked Zarathustra vehemently, "what do you here?
And why call you yourself my shadow? you are not pleasing to me."
"Forgive me," answered the shadow, "that it is I; and if I please you not
- well, O Zarathustra! therein do I admire you and your good taste.
A wanderer am I, who have walked long at your heels; always on the
way, but without a goal, also without a home: so that truly, I lack little of
being the eternally Wandering Jew, except that I am not eternal and not a
Jew.
What? Must I ever be on the way? Whirled by every wind, unsettled,
driven about? O earth, you have become too round for me!
On every surface have I already sat, like tired dust have I fallen asleep
on mirrors and window-panes: everything takes from me, nothing gives;
I become thin - I am almost equal to a shadow.
After you, however, O Zarathustra, did I fly and hasten longest; and
though I hid myself from you, I was nevertheless your best shadow:
wherever you have sat, there sat I also.
With you have I wandered about in the remotest, coldest worlds, like a
phantom that voluntarily haunts winter roofs and snows.
With you have I pushed into all the forbidden, all the worst and the
furthest: and if there be anything of virtue in me, it is that I have had no
fear of any prohibition.
With you have I broken up whatever my heart revered; all boundarystones
and statues have I overthrown; the most dangerous wishes did I
pursue, - truly, beyond every crime did I once go.
With you did I unlearn the belief in words and worths and in great
names. When the devil casts his skin, does not his name also fall away? It
is also skin. The devil himself is perhaps - skin.
'Nothing is true, all is permitted': so said I to myself. Into the coldest
water did I plunge with head and heart. Ah, how oft did I stand there
naked on that account, like a red crab!
Ah, where have gone all my goodness and all my shame and all my
212
belief in the good! Ah, where is the lying innocence which I once possessed,
the innocence of the good and of their noble lies!
Too oft, truly, did I follow close to the heels of truth: then did it kick me
on the face. Sometimes I meant to lie, and Behold. then only did I hit -
the truth.
Too much has become clear to me: now it does not concern me any
more. Nothing lives any longer that I love, - how should I still love myself?
'To live as I incline, or not to live at all': so do I wish; so wishes also the
holiest. But Alas. how have I still - inclination?
Have I - still a goal? A haven towards which my sail is set?
A good wind? Ah, he only who knows where he sails, knows what
wind is good, and a fair wind for him.
What still remains to me? A heart weary and flippant; an unstable will;
fluttering wings; a broken backbone.
This seeking for my home: O Zarathustra, do you know that this seeking
has been my home-sickening; it eats me up.
'Where is - my home?' For it do I ask and seek, and have sought, but
have not found it. O eternal everywhere, O eternal nowhere, O eternal -
in-vain!"
Thus spoke the shadow, and Zarathustra's countenance lengthened at
his words. "you are my shadow!" said he at last sadly.
"your danger is not small, you free spirit and wanderer! you have had a
bad day: see that a still worse evening does not overtake you!
To such unsettled ones as you, seems at last even a prisoner blessed.
Didst you ever see how captured criminals sleep? They sleep quietly,
they enjoy their new security.
Beware lest in the end a narrow faith capture you, a hard, rigorous delusion!
For now everything that is narrow and fixed seduces and tempts
you.
You have lost your goal. Alas, how will you forego and forget that
loss? Thereby - have you also lost your way!
You poor rover and rambler, you tired butterfly! will you have a rest
and a home this evening? Then go up to my cave!
There leads the way to my cave. And now will I run quickly away from
you again. Already lies as it were a shadow upon me.
I will run alone, so that it may again become bright around me. Therefore
must I still be a long time merrily upon my legs. In the evening,
however, there will be - dancing with me!" - -
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
213
Part 4, (10) NOONTIDE
-AND Zarathustra ran and ran, but he found no one else, and was
alone and ever found himself again; he enjoyed and quaffed his solitude,
and thought of good things - for hours. About the hour of noontide,
however, when the sun stood exactly over Zarathustra's head, he passed
an old, bent and gnarled tree, which was encircled round by the ardent
love of a vine, and hidden from itself; from this there hung yellow grapes
in abundance, confronting the wanderer. Then he felt inclined to quench
a little thirst, and to break off for himself a cluster of grapes. When,
however, he had already his arm out-stretched for that purpose, he felt
still more inclined for something else - namely, to lie down beside the
tree at the hour of perfect noontide and sleep.
This Zarathustra did; and no sooner had he laid himself on the ground
in the stillness and secrecy of the variegated grass, than he had forgotten
his little thirst, and fell asleep. For as the proverb of Zarathustra says:
"One thing is more necessary than the other." Only that his eyes remained
open: - for they never grew weary of viewing and admiring the
tree and the love of the vine. In falling asleep, however, Zarathustra
spoke thus to his heart:
"Hush! Hush! has not the world now become perfect? What has
happened to me?
As a delicate wind dances invisibly upon parqueted seas, light, featherlight,
so - dances sleep upon me.
No eye does it close to me, it leaves my soul awake. Light is it, truly,
feather-light.
It persuades me, I know not how, it touches me inwardly with a caressing
hand, it constrains me. Yes, it constrains me, so that my soul stretches
itself out:-
-How long and weary it becomes, my strange soul! has a seventh-day
evening come to it precisely at noontide? has it already wandered too
long, blissfully, among good and ripe things?
It stretches itself out, long - longer! it lies still, my strange soul. Too
many good things has it already tasted; this golden sadness oppresses it,
it distorts its mouth.
-As a ship that putts into the calmest cove: - it now draws up to the
214
land, weary of long voyages and uncertain seas. Is not the land more
faithful?
As such a ship hugs the shore, tugs the shore: - then it suffices for a
spider to spin its thread from the ship to the land. No stronger ropes are
required there.
As such a weary ship in the calmest cove, so do I also now repose, close
to the earth, faithful, trusting, waiting, bound to it with the lightest
threads.
O happiness! O happiness! will you perhaps sing, O my soul? you lie in
the grass. But this is the secret, solemn hour, when no shepherd plays his
pipe.
Take care! Hot noontide sleeps on the fields. Do not sing! Hush! The
world is perfect.
Do not sing, you prairie-bird, my soul! Do not even whisper! Behold -
hush! The old noontide sleeps, it moves its mouth: does it not just now
drink a drop of happiness-
-An old brown drop of golden happiness, golden wine? Something
whisks over it, its happiness laughs. Thus - laughs a God. Hush!-
-'For happiness, how little suffices for happiness!' Thus spoke I once
and thought myself wise. But it was a blasphemy: that have I now
learned. Wise fools speak better.
The least thing precisely, the gentlest thing, the lightest thing, a lizard's
rustling, a breath, a whisk, an eye-glance - little makes up the best happiness.
Hush!
-What has befallen me: Hark! has time flown away? Do I not fall? Have
I not fallen - hark! into the well of eternity?
-What happens to me? Hush! It stings me - alas - to the heart? To the
heart! Oh, break up, break up, my heart, after such happiness, after such
a sting!
-What? has not the world just now become perfect? Round and ripe?
Oh, for the golden round ring - where does it fly? Let me run after it!
Quick!
Hush - -" (and here Zarathustra stretched himself, and felt that he was
asleep.)
"Up!" said he to himself, "you sleeper! you noontide sleeper! Well then,
up, you old legs! It is time and more than time; many a good stretch of
road is still awaiting you-
Now have you slept your fill; for how long a time? A half-eternity!
Well then, up now, my old heart! For how long after such a sleep may
you - remain awake?"
215
(But then did he fall asleep anew, and his soul spoke against him and
defended itself, and lay down again) - "Leave me alone! Hush! has not
the world just now become perfect? Oh, for the golden round ball!-
"Get up," said Zarathustra, "you little thief, you sluggard! What! Still
stretching yourself, yawning, sighing, failing into deep wells?
Who are you then, O my soul!" (and here he became frightened, for a
sunbeam shot down from heaven upon his face.)
"O heaven above me," said he sighing, and sat upright, "you gaze at
me? you listento my strange soul?
When will you drink this drop of dew that fell down upon all earthly
things, - when will you drink this strange soul-
-When, you well of eternity! you joyous, awful, noontide abyss! when
will you drink my soul back into you?"
Thus spoke Zarathustra, and rose from his couch beside the tree, as if
awakening from a strange drunkenness: and Behold. there stood the sun
still exactly above his head. One might, however, rightly infer from there
that Zarathustra had not then slept long.
Part 4, (11) The Greeting
IT WAS late in the afternoon only when Zarathustra, after long useless
searching and strolling about, again came home to his cave. When,
however, he stood over against it, not more than twenty paces from
there, the thing happened which he now least of all expected: he heard
anew the great cry of distress. And extraordinary! this time the cry came
out of his own cave. It was a long, manifold, peculiar cry, and Zarathustra
plainly distinguished that it was composed of many voices: although
heard at a distance it might sound like the cry out of a single mouth.
Thereupon Zarathustra rushed forward to his cave, and Behold. what a
spectacle awaited him after that concert! For there did they all sit together
whom he had passed during the day: the king on the right and the
king on the left, the old magician, the pope, the voluntary beggar, the
shadow, the intellectually conscientious one, the sorrowful soothsayer,
and the ass; the ugliest man, however, had set a crown on his head, and
had put round him two purple girdles, - for he liked, like all ugly ones,
to disguise himself and play the handsome person. In the midst,
however, of that sorrowful company stood Zarathustra's eagle, ruffled
216
and disquieted, for it had been called upon to answer too much for
which its pride had not any answer; the wise serpent however hung
round its neck.
All this did Zarathustra behold with great astonishment; then however
he scrutinised each individual guest with courteous curiosity, read their
souls and wondered anew. In the meantime the assembled ones had risen
from their seats, and waited with reverence for Zarathustra to speak.
Zarathustra however spoke thus:
"You despairing ones! you strange ones! So it was your cry of distress
that I heard? And now do I know also where he is to be sought, whom I
have sought for in vain today: the higher man-:
-In my own cave sits he, the higher man! But why do I wonder! Have
not I myself allured him to me by honey-offerings and artful lure-calls of
my happiness?
But it seems to me that you are badly adapted for company: you make
one another's hearts fretful, you that cry for help, when you sit here together?
There is one that must first come,
-One who will make you laugh once more, a good jovial buffoon, a
dancer, a wind, a wild romp, some old fool: - what think you?
Forgive me, however, you despairing ones, for speaking such trivial
words before you, unworthy, truly, of such guests! But you do not divine
what makes my heart wanton:-
-You yourselves do it, and your aspect, forgive it me! For everyone becomes
courageous who beholds a despairing one. To encourage a despairing
one - everyone thinks himself strong enough to do so.
To myself have you given this power, - a good gift, my honourable
guests! An excellent guest's-present! Well, do not then upbraid when I
also offer you something of mine.
This is my empire and my dominion: that which is mine, however,
shall this evening and tonight be yours. my animals shall serve you: let
my cave be your resting-place!
At house and home with me shall no one despair: in my purlieus do I
protect everyone from his wild beasts. And that is the first thing which I
offer you: security!
The second thing, however, is my little finger. And when you have
that, then take the whole hand also, yes and the heart with it! Welcome
here, welcome to you, my guests!"
Thus spoke Zarathustra, and laughed with love and mischief. After this
greeting his guests bowed once more and were reverentially silent; the
king on the right, however, answered him in their name.
217
"O Zarathustra, by the way in which you have given us your hand and
your greeting, we recognise you as Zarathustra. you have humbled yourself
before us; almost have you hurt our reverence-:
-Who however could have humbled himself as you have done, with
such pride? That uplifts us ourselves; a refreshment is it, to our eyes and
hearts.
To behold this, merely, gladly would we ascend higher mountains than
this. For as eager beholders have we come; we wanted to see what
brightens dim eyes.
And Behold. now is it all over with our cries of distress. Now are our
minds and hearts open and enraptured. Little is lacking for our spirits to
become wanton.
There is nothing, O Zarathustra, that grows more pleasingly on earth
than a lofty, strong will: it is the finest growth. An entire landscape refreshes
itself at one such tree.
To the pine do I compare him, O Zarathustra, which grows up like you
- tall, silent, hardy, solitary, of the best, supplest wood, stately,-
-In the end, however, grasping out for its dominion with strong, green
branches, asking weighty questions of the wind, the storm, and whatever
is at home on high places;
-Answering more weightily, a commander, a victor! Oh! who should
not ascend high mountains to behold such growths?
At your tree, O Zarathustra, the gloomy and ill-constituted also refresh
themselves; at your look even the wavering become steady and heal their
hearts.
And truly, towards your mountain and your tree do many eyes turn today;
a great longing has arisen, and many have learned to ask: 'Who is
Zarathustra?'
And those into whose ears you have at any time dripped your song
and your honey: all the hidden ones, the lonesome and the twosome,
have simultaneously said to their hearts:
'does Zarathustra still live? It is no longer worthwhile to live,
everything is indifferent, everything is useless: or else - we must live
with Zarathustra!'
'Why does he not come who has so long announced himself?' thus do
many people ask; 'has solitude swallowed him up? Or should we perhaps
go to him?'
Now does it come to pass that solitude itself becomes fragile and
breaks open, like a grave that breaks open and can no longer hold its
dead. Everywhere one sees resurrected ones.
218
Now do the waves rise and rise around your mountain, O Zarathustra.
And however high be your height, many of them must rise up to you:
your boat shall not rest much longer on dry ground.
And that we despairing ones have now come into your cave, and
already no longer despair: - it is but a prognostic and a presage that better
ones are on the way to you,-
-For they themselves are on the way to you, the last remnant of God
among men - that is to say, all the men of great longing, of great loathing,
of great satiety,
-All who do not want to live unless they learn again to hope - unless
they learn from you, O Zarathustra, the great hope!"
Thus spoke the king on the right, and seized the hand of Zarathustra in
order to kiss it; but Zarathustra checked his veneration, and stepped
back frightened, fleeing as it were, silently and suddenly into the far distance.
After a little while, however, he was again at home with his
guests, looked at them with clear scrutinising eyes, and said:
"My guests, you higher men, I will speak plain language and plainly
with you. It is not for you that I have waited here in these mountains."
("'Plain language and plainly?' Good God!" said here the king on the
left to himself; "one sees he does not know the good Occidentals, this
sage out of the Orient!
But he means 'blunt language and bluntly' - well! That is not the worst
taste in these days!")
"You may, truly, all of you be higher men," continued Zarathustra; "but
for me - you are neither high enough, nor strong enough.
For me, that is to say, for the inexorable which is now silent in me, but
will not always be silent. And if you appertain to me, still it is not as my
right arm.
For he who himself stands, like you, on sickly and tender legs, wishes
above all to be treated indulgently, whether he be conscious of it or hide
it from himself.
My arms and my legs, however, I do not treat indulgently, I do not
treat my warriors indulgently: how then could you be fit for my warfare?
With you I should spoil all my victories. And many of you would
tumble over if you but heard the loud beating of my drums.
Moreover, you are not sufficiently beautiful and well-born for me. I require
pure, smooth mirrors for my doctrines; on your surface even my
own likeness is distorted.
On your shoulders presses many a burden, many a recollection; many
a mischievous dwarf squats in your corners. There is concealed populace
219
also in you.
And though you be high and of a higher type, much in you is crooked
and misshapen. There is no smith in the world that could hammer you
right and straight for me.
You are only bridges: may higher ones pass over upon you! you signify
steps: so do not upbraid him who ascends beyond you into his height!
Out of your seed there may one day arise for me a genuine son and
perfect heir: but that time is distant. you yourselves are not those to
whom my heritage and name belong.
Not for you do I wait here in these mountains; not with you may I descend
for the last time. you have come to me only as a presage that higher
ones are on the way to me,-
-Not the men of great longing, of great loathing, of great satiety, and
that which you call the remnant of God;
-No! No! Three times No! For others do I wait here in these mountains,
and will not lift my foot from thence without them;
-For higher ones, stronger ones, triumphanter ones, merrier ones, for
such as are built squarely in body and soul: laughing lions must come!
O my guests, you strange ones - have you yet heard nothing of my children?
And that they are on the way to me?
Do speak to me of my gardens, of my Happy Isles, of my new beautiful
race - why do you not speak to me thereof?
This guests' - present do I solicit of your love, that you speak to me of
my children. For them am I rich, for them I became poor: what have I not
surrendered.
What would I not surrender that I might have one thing: these children,
this living plantation, these life-trees of my will and of my highest
hope!"
Thus spoke Zarathustra, and stopped suddenly in his discourse: for his
longing came over him, and he closed his eyes and his mouth, because of
the agitation of his heart. And all his guests also were silent, and stood
still and confounded: except only that the old soothsayer made signs
with his hands and his gestures.
Part 4, (12) THE SUPPER
FOR at this point the soothsayer interrupted the greeting of
220
Zarathustra and his guests: he pressed forward as one who had no time
to lose, seized Zarathustra's hand and exclaimed: "But Zarathustra!
One thing is more necessary than the other, so say you yourself: well,
one thing is now more necessary to me than all others.
A word at the right time: didst you not invite me to table? And here are
many who have made long journeys. you do not mean to feed us merely
with discourses?
Besides, all of you have thought too much about freezing, drowning,
suffocating, and other bodily dangers: none of you, however, have
thought of my danger, namely, perishing of hunger-"
(Thus spoke the soothsayer. When Zarathustra's animals, however,
heard these words, they ran away in terror. For they saw that all they
had brought home during the day would not be enough to fill the one
soothsayer.)
"Likewise perishing of thirst," continued the soothsayer. "And although
I hear water splashing here like words of wisdom - that is to say,
plenteously and unweariedly, I - want wine!
Not everyone is a born water-drinker like Zarathustra. Neither does
water suit weary and withered ones: we deserve wine - it alone gives immediate
vigour and improvised health!"
On this occasion, when the soothsayer was longing for wine, it
happened that the king on the left, the silent one, also found expression
for once. "We took care," said he, "about wine, I, along with my brother
the king on the right: we have enough of wine, - a whole ass-load of it.
So there is nothing lacking but bread."
"Bread," replied Zarathustra, laughing when he spoke, "it is precisely
bread that hermits have not. But man does not live by bread alone, but
also by the flesh of good lambs, of which I have two:
-These shall we slaughter quickly, and cook spicily with sage: it is so
that I like them. And there is also no lack of roots and fruits, good
enough even for the fastidious and dainty, - nor of nuts and other riddles
for cracking.
Thus will we have a good repast in a little while. But whoever wishes
to eat with us must also give a hand to the work, even the kings. For
with Zarathustra even a king may be a cook."
This proposal appealed to the hearts of all of them, save that the voluntary
beggar objected to the flesh and wine and spices.
"Just hear this glutton Zarathustra!" said he jokingly: "does one go into
caves and high mountains to make such repasts?
Now indeed do I understand what he once taught us: Blessed be
221
moderate poverty!' And why he wishes to do away with beggars."
"Be of good cheer," replied Zarathustra, "as I am. Abide by your customs,
you excellent one: grind your corn, drink your water, praise your
cooking, - if only it make you glad!
I am a law only for my own; I am not a law for all. He, however, who
belongs to me must be strong of bone and light of foot,-
-Joyous in fight and feast, no sulker, no John o' Dreams, ready for the
hardest task as for the feast, healthy and hale.
The best belongs to my and me; and if it be not given us, then do we
take it: - the best food, the purest sky, the strongest thoughts, the fairest
women!"-
Thus spoke Zarathustra; the king on the right however answered and
said: "Strange! Did one ever hear such sensible things out of the mouth of
a wise man?
And truly, it is the strangest thing in a wise man, if over and above, he
be still sensible, and not an ass."
Thus spoke the king on the right and wondered; the ass however, with
ill-will, said YE-A to his remark. This however was the beginning of that
long repast which is called "The Supper" in the history-books. At this
there was nothing else spoken of but the higher man.
Part 4, (13) THE HIGHER MAN
1.
WHEN I came to men for the first time, then did I commit the hermit
folly, the great folly: I appeared on the market-place.
And when I spoke to all, I spoke to none. In the evening, however,
rope-dancers were my companions, and corpses; and I myself almost a
corpse.
With the new morning, however, there came to me a new truth: then
did I learn to say: "Of what account to me are market-place and populace
and populace-noise and long populace-cars!"
You higher men, learn this from me: On the market-place no one believes
in higher men. But if you will speak there, very well! The populace,
however, blinks: "We are all equal."
"You higher men," - so blinks the populace - "there are no higher men,
we are all equal; man is man, before God - we are all equal!"
222
Before God! - Now, however, this God has died. Before the populace,
however, we will not be equal. you higher men, away from the marketplace!
2.
Before God! - Now however this God has died! you higher men, this
God was your greatest danger.
Only since he lay in the grave have you again arisen. Now only comes
the great noontide, now only does the higher man become - master!
Have you understood this word, O my brothers? you are frightened:
do your hearts turn giddy? does the abyss here yawn for you? does the
hell-hound here yelp at you?
Well! Take heart! you higher men! Now only travails the mountain of
the human future. God has died: now do we desire - the overman to live.
3.
The most careful ask to-day: "How is man to be maintained?" Zarathustra
however asks, as the first and only one: "How is man to be surpassed?"
The overman, I have at heart; that is the first and only thing to me - and
not man: not the neighbour, not the poorest, not the sorriest, not the
best.-
O my brothers, what I can love in man is that he is an over-going and a
down-going. And also in you there is much that makes me love and
hope.
In that you have despised, you higher men, that makes me hope. For
the great despisers are the great reverers.
In that you have despaired, there is much to honour. For you have not
learned to submit yourselves, you have not learned petty policy.
For to-day have the petty people become master: they all preach submission
and humility and policy and diligence and consideration and the
long et cetera of petty virtues.
Whatever is of the effeminate type, whatever originates from the
servile type, and especially the populace-mishmash: - that wishes now to
be master of all human destiny - O disgust! Disgust! Disgust!
That asks and asks and never tires: "How is man to maintain himself
best, longest, most pleasantly?" Thereby - are they the masters of today.
These masters of today - surpass them, O my brothers - these petty
people: they are the overman's greatest danger!
Surpass, you higher men, the petty virtues, the petty policy, the sandgrain
considerateness, the ant-hill trumpery, the pitiable comfortableness,
the "happiness of the greatest number"-!
223
And rather despair than submit yourselves. And truly, I love you, because
you know not today how to live, you higher men! For thus do you
live - best!
4.
Have you courage, O my brothers? Are you stout-hearted? Not the
courage before witnesses, but hermit and eagle courage, which not even
a God any longer beholds?
Cold souls, mules, the blind and the drunken, I do not call stouthearted.
He has heart who knows fear, but vanquishes it; who sees the
abyss, but with pride.
He who sees the abyss, but with eagle's eyes, - he who with eagle's
talons grasps the abyss: he has courage. - -
5.
"Man is evil" - so said to me for consolation, all the wisest ones. Ah, if
only it be still true today! For the evil is man's best force.
"Man must become better and eviler" - so do I teach. The evilest is necessary
for the overman's best.
It may have been well for the preacher of the petty people to suffer and
be burdened by men's sin. I, however, rejoice in great sin as my great
consolation.-
Such things, however, are not said for long ears. Every word, also, is
not suited for every mouth. These are fine far-away things: at them
sheep's claws shall not grasp!
6.
You higher men, think you that I am here to put right what you have
put wrong?
Or that I wished henceforth to make snugger couches for you sufferers?
Or show you restless, miswandering, misclimbing ones, new and
easier footpaths?
No! No! Three times No! Always more, always better ones of your type
shall succumb, - for you shall always have it worse and harder. Thus
only-
-Thus only grows man aloft to the height where the lightning strikes
and shatters him: high enough for the lightning!
Towards the few, the long, the remote go forth my soul and my seeking:
of what account to me are your many little, short miseries!
You do not yet suffer enough for me! For you suffer from yourselves,
you have not yet suffered from man. you would lie if you spoke otherwise!
None of you suffers from what I have suffered. - -
7.
224
It is not enough for me that the lightning no longer does harm. I do not
wish to conduct it away: it shall learn - to work for me.-
My wisdom has accumulated long like a cloud, it becomes stiller and
darker. So does all wisdom which shall one day bear lightning.-
to these men of today will I not be light, nor be called light. Them - will
I blind: lightning of my wisdom! put out their eyes!
8.
Do not will anything beyond your power: there is a bad falseness in
those who will beyond their power.
Especially when they will great things! For they awaken distrust in
great things, these subtle false-coiners and stage-players:-
-Until at last they are false towards themselves, squint-eyed, whited
cankers, glossed over with strong words, parade virtues and brilliant
false deeds.
Take good care there, you higher men! For nothing is more precious to
me, and rarer, than honesty.
Is this today not that of the populace? The populace however knows
not what is great and what is small, what is straight and what is honest:
it is innocently crooked, it ever lies.
9.
Have a good distrust today you, higher men, you enheartened ones!
you open-hearted ones! And keep your reasons secret! For this today is
that of the populace.
What the populace once learned to believe without reasons, who could
- refute it to them by means of reasons?
And on the market-place one convinces with gestures. But reasons
make the populace distrustful.
And when truth has once triumphed there, then ask yourselves with
good distrust: "What strong error has fought for it?"
Be on your guard also against the learned! They hate you, because they
are unproductive! They have cold, withered eyes before which every
bird is unplumed.
Such persons vaunt about not lying: but inability to lie is still far from
being love to truth. Be on your guard!
Freedom from fever is still far from being knowledge! Refrigerated
spirits I do not believe in. He who cannot lie, does not know what truth
is.
10.
If you would go up high, then use your own legs! Do not get
yourselves carried aloft; do not seat yourselves on other people's backs
225
and heads!
You have mounted, however, on horseback? you now ride briskly up
to your goal? Well, my friend! But your lame foot is also with you on
horseback!
When you reach your goal, when you alight from your horse: precisely
on your height, you higher man, - then will you stumble!
11.
You creating ones, you higher men! One is only pregnant with one's
own child.
Do not let yourselves be imposed upon or put upon! Who then is your
neighbour? Even if you act "for your neighbour" - you still do not create
for him!
Unlearn, I pray you, this "for," you creating ones: your very virtue
wishes you to have naught to do with "for" and "on account of" and
"because." Against these false little words shall you stop your ears.
"For one's neighbour," is the virtue only of the petty people: there it is
said "like and like," and "hand washes hand": - they have neither the
right nor the power for your self-seeking!
In your self-seeking, you creating ones, there is the foresight and foreseeing
of the pregnant! What no one's eye has yet seen, namely, the fruit
- this, shelters and saves and nourishes your entire love.
Where your entire love is, namely, with your child, there is also your
entire virtue! Your work, your will is your "neighbour": let no false values
impose upon you!
12.
You creating ones, you higher men! Whoever has to give birth is sick;
whoever has given birth, however, is unclean.
Ask women: one gives birth, not because it gives pleasure. The pain
makes hens and poets cackle.
You creating ones, in you there is much uncleanliness. That is because
you have had to be mothers.
A new child: oh, how much new filth has also come into the world! Go
apart! He who has given birth shall wash his soul!
13.
Be not virtuous beyond your powers! And seek nothing from
yourselves opposed to probability!
Walk in the footsteps in which your fathers' virtue has already walked!
How would you rise high, if your fathers' will should not rise with you?
He, however, who would be a firstling, let him take care lest he also become
a lastling! And where the vices of your fathers are, there should
226
you not set up as saints!
He whose fathers were inclined for women, and for strong wine and
flesh of wildboar swine; what would it be if he demanded chastity of
himself?
A folly would it be! Much, truly, does it seem to me for such a one, if
he should be the husband of one or of two or of three women.
And if he founded monasteries, and inscribed over their portals: "The
way to holiness," - I should still say: What good is it! it is a new folly!
He has founded for himself a penance-house and refuge-house: much
good may it do! But I do not believe in it.
In solitude there grows what anyone brings into it - also the brute in
one's nature. Thus is solitude inadvisable to many.
has there ever been anything filthier on earth than the saints of the wilderness?
Around them was not only the devil loose - but also the swine.
14.
Shy, ashamed, awkward, like the tiger whose spring has failed - thus,
you higher men, have I often seen you slink aside. A cast which you
made had failed.
But what does it matter, you dice-players! you had not learned to play
and mock, as one must play and mock! Do we not ever sit at a great table
of mocking and playing?
And if great things have been a failure with you, have you yourselves
therefore - been a failure? And if you yourselves have been a failure, has
man therefore - been a failure? If man, however, has been a failure: well
then! never mind!
15.
The higher its type, always the seldomer does a thing succeed. you
higher men here, have you not all - been failures?
Be of good cheer; what does it matter? How much is still possible!
Learn to laugh at yourselves, as you ought to laugh!
What wonder even that you have failed and only half-succeeded, you
half-shattered ones! does not - man's future strive and struggle in you?
Man's furthest, profoundest, star-highest issues, his prodigious powers
- do not all these foam through one another in your vessel?
What wonder that many a vessel shatters! Learn to laugh at yourselves,
as you ought to laugh! you higher men, Oh, how much is still possible!
And truly, how much has already succeeded! How rich is this earth in
small, good, perfect things, in well-constituted things!
Set around you small, good, perfect things, you higher men. Their
golden maturity heals the heart. The perfect teaches one to hope.
227
16.
What has thus far been the greatest sin here on earth? Was it not the
word of him who said: "Woe to them that laugh now!"
Did he himself find no cause for laughter on the earth? Then he sought
badly. A child even finds cause for it.
He - did not love sufficiently: otherwise would he also have loved us,
the laughing ones! But he hated and hooted us; wailing and teeth-gnashing
did he promise us.
Must one then curse immediately, when one does not love? That -
seems to me bad taste. Thus did he, however, this absolute one. He
sprang from the populace.
And he himself just did not love sufficiently; otherwise would he have
raged less because people did not love him. All great love does not seek
love: - it seeks more.
Go out of the way of all such absolute ones! They are a poor sickly
type, a populace-type: they look at this life with ill-will, they have an evil
eye for this earth.
Go out of the way of all such absolute ones! They have heavy feet and
sultry hearts: - they do not know how to dance. How could the earth be
light to such ones!
17.
Tortuously do all good things come close to their goal. Like cats they
curve their backs, they purr inwardly with their approaching happiness,
- all good things laugh.
His step betrays whether a person already walks on his own path: just
see me walk! He, however, who comes close to his goal, dances.
And truly, a statue have I not become, not yet do I stand there stiff, stupid
and stony, like a pillar; I love fast racing.
And though there be on earth fens and dense afflictions, he who has
light feet runs even across the mud, and dances, as upon well-swept ice.
Lift up your hearts, my brothers, high, higher! And do not forget your
legs! Lift up also your legs, you good dancers, and better still, if you
stand upon your heads!
18.
This crown of the laughter, this rose-garland crown: I myself have put
on this crown, I myself have consecrated my laughter. No one else have I
found to-day potent enough for this.
Zarathustra the dancer, Zarathustra the light one, who beckons with
his pinions, one ready for flight, beckoning to all birds, ready and prepared,
a blissfully light-spirited one:-
228
Zarathustra the soothsayer, Zarathustra the sooth-laugher, no impatient
one, no absolute one, one who loves leaps and side-leaps; I myself
have put on this crown!
19.
Lift up your hearts, my brothers, high, higher! And do not forget your
legs! Lift up also your legs, you good dancers, and better still if you
stand upon your heads!
There are also heavy animals in a state of happiness, there are clubfooted
ones from the beginning. Curiously do they exert themselves, like
an elephant which endeavours to stand upon its head.
Better, however, to be foolish with happiness than foolish with misfortune,
better to dance awkwardly than walk lamely. So learn, I pray you,
my wisdom, you higher men: even the worst thing has two good reverse
sides,-
-Even the worst thing has good dancing-legs: so learn, I pray you, you
higher men, to put yourselves on your proper legs!
So unlearn, I pray you, the sorrow-sighing, and all the populace-sadness!
Oh, how sad the buffoons of the populace seem to me today! This
today, however, is that of the populace.
20.
Do like to the wind when it rushes forth from its mountain-caves: to its
own piping will it dance; the seas tremble and leap under its footsteps.
That which gives wings to asses, that which milks the lionesses: -
praised be that good, unruly spirit, which comes like a hurricane to all
the present and to all the populace,-
-Which is hostile to thistle-heads and puzzle-heads, and to all withered
leaves and weeds: - praised be this wild, good, free spirit of the storm,
which dances upon fens and afflictions, as upon meadows!
Which hats the consumptive populace-dogs, and all the ill-constituted,
sullen brood: - praised be this spirit of all free spirits, the laughing storm,
which blows dust into the eyes of all the melanopic and melancholic!
You higher men, the worst thing in you is that you have none of you
learned to dance as you ought to dance - to dance beyond yourselves!
What does it matter that you have failed!
How many things are still possible! So learn to laugh beyond
yourselves! Lift up your hearts, you good dancers, high! higher! And do
not forget the good laughter!
This crown of the laughter, this rose-garland crown: to you, my brothers,
do I cast this crown! Laughing have I consecrated; you higher men,
learn, I pray you - to laugh!
229
Part 4, (14) THE SONG OF MELANCHOLY
1.
WHEN Zarathustra spoke these sayings, he stood close to the entrance
of his cave; with the last words, however, he slipped away from his
guests, and fled for a little while into the open air.
"O pure odours around me," cried he, "O blessed stillness around me!
But where are my animals? Hither, hither, my eagle and my serpent!
Tell me, my animals: these higher men, all of them - do they perhaps
not smell well? O pure odours around me! Now only do I know and feel
how I love you, my animals."
-And Zarathustra said once more: "I love you, my animals!" The eagle,
however, and the serpent pressed close to him when he spoke these
words, and looked up to him. In this attitude were they all three silent
together, and sniffed and sipped the good air with one another. For the
air here outside was better than with the higher men.
2.
Hardly, however, had Zarathustra left the cave when the old magician
got up, looked cunningly about him, and said: "He is gone!
And already, you higher men - let me tickle you with this complimentary
and flattering name, as he himself dos - already does my evil spirit of
deceit and magic attack me, my melancholy devil,
-Which is an adversary to this Zarathustra from the very heart: forgive
it for this! Now does it wish to beseech before you, it has just its hour; in
vain do I struggle with this evil spirit.
to all of you, whatever honours you like to assume in your names,
whether you call yourselves 'the free spirits' or 'the conscientious,' or 'the
penitents of the spirit,' or 'the unfettered,' or 'the great longers,'-
-Unto all of you, who like me suffer from the great loathing, to whom
the old God has died, and as yet no new God lies in cradles and swaddling
clothes - to all of you is my evil spirit and magic-devil favourable.
I know you, you higher men, I know him, - I know also this fiend
whom I love in spite of me, this Zarathustra: he himself often seems to
me like the beautiful mask of a saint,
-Like a new strange mummery in which my evil spirit, the melancholy
devil, delights: - I love Zarathustra, so does it often seem to me, for the
230
sake of my evil spirit.-
But already does it attack me and constrain me, this spirit of melancholy,
this evening-twilight devil: and truly, you higher men, it has a
longing-
-Open your eyes! - it has a longing to come naked, whether male or female,
I do not yet know: but it comes, it constrains me, Alas. open your
wits!
The day dies out, to all things comes now the evening, also to the best
things; hear now, and see, you higher men, what devil - man or woman -
this spirit of evening-melancholy is!"
Thus spoke the old magician, looked cunningly about him, and then
seized his harp.
3.
In evening's limpid air,
What time the dew's soothings
to the earth downpour,
Invisibly and unheard-
For tender shoe-gear wear
The soothing dews, like all that's kind-gentle-:
Bethink you then, bethink you, burning heart,
How once you thirsted
For heaven's kindly teardrops and dew's down-droppings,
All singed and weary thirsted,
What time on yellow grass-pathways
Wicked, occidental sunny glances
Through sombre trees about you sported,
Blindingly sunny glow-glances, gladly-hurting?
"Of truth the wooer? You?" - so taunted they-
"No! Merely poet!
A brute insidious, plundering, grovelling,
That aye must lie,
That wittingly, wilfully, aye must lie:
For booty lusting,
Motley masked,
Self-hidden, shrouded,
Himself his booty-
He - of truth the wooer?
No! Mere fool! Mere poet!
Just motley speaking,
From mask of fool confusedly shouting,
231
Circumambling on fabricated word-bridges,
On motley rainbow-arches,
between the spurious heavenly,
And spurious earthly,
Round us roving, round us soaring,-
Mere fool! Mere poet!
He - of truth the wooer?
Not still, stiff, smooth and cold,
Become an image,
A godlike statue,
Set up in front of temples,
As a God's own door-guard:
No! hostile to all such truthfulness-statues,
In every desert homelier than at temples,
With cattish wantonness,
Through every window leaping
Quickly into chances,
Every wild forest a-sniffing,
Greedily-longingly, sniffing,
That you, in wild forests,
'Mong the motley-speckled fierce creatures,
Should rove, sinful-sound and fine-coloured,
With longing lips smacking,
Blessedly mocking, blessedly hellish, blessedly blood-thirsty,
Robbing, skulking, lying - roving: -
Or to eagles like which fixedly,
Long adown the precipice look,
Adown their precipice: - -
Oh, how they whirl down now,
Thereunder, therein,
To ever deeper profoundness whirling!-
Then,
Sudden,
With aim aright,
With quivering flight,
On lambkins pouncing,
Headlong down, sore-hungry,
For lambkins longing,
Fierce 'gainst all lamb-spirits,
Furious-fierce all that look
232
Sheeplike, or lambeyed, or crisp-woolly,
-Grey, with lambsheep kindliness!
Even thus,
Eaglelike, pantherlike,
Are the poet's desires,
Are your own desires 'neath a thousand guises.
You fool! you poet!
You who all mankind viewed-
So God, as sheep-:
The God to rend within mankind,
As the sheep in mankind,
And in rending laughing -
That, that is your own blessedness!
Of a panther and eagle - blessedness!
Of a poet and fool - the blessedness! - -
In evening's limpid air,
What time the moon's sickle,
Green, between the purple-glowings,
And jealous, steal'th forth:
-Of day the foe,
With every step in secret,
The rosy garland-hammocks
Downsickling, till they've sunken
Down nightwards, faded, downsunken: -
Thus had I sunken one day
From my own truth-insanity,
From my own fervid day-longings,
Of day weary, sick of sunshine,
-Sunk downwards, evenwards, shadowwards:
By one sole trueness
All scorched and thirsty:
-Bethink you still, bethinkst you, burning heart,
How then you thirsted?-
That I should banned be
From all the trueness!
Mere fool! Mere poet!
233
Part 4, (15) SCIENCE
THUS sang the magician; and all who were present went like birds unawares
into the net of his artful and melancholy voluptuousness. Only
the spiritually conscientious one had not been caught: he at once
snatched the harp from the magician and called out: "Air! Let in good
air! Let in Zarathustra! you make this cave sultry and poisonous, you
bad old magician!
You seduce, you false one, you subtle one, to unknown desires and
deserts. And alas, that such as you should talk and make ado about the
truth!
Alas, to all free spirits who are not on their guard against such magicians!
It is all over with their freedom: you teach and tempt back into
prisons,-
-you old melancholy devil, out of your lament sounds a lurement: you
resemble those who with their praise of chastity secretly invite to voluptuousness!
Thus spoke the conscientious one; the old magician, however, looked
about him, enjoying his triumph, and on that account put up with the
annoyance which the conscientious one caused him. "Be still!" said he
with modest voice, "good songs want to re-echo well; after good songs
one should be long silent.
Thus do all those present, the higher men. You, however, have perhaps
understood but little of my song? In you there is little of the magic spirit.
"you praise me," replied the conscientious one, "in that you separate me
from yourself; very well! But, you others, what do I see? you still sit
there, all of you, with lusting eyes-:
You free spirits, where has your freedom gone! you almost seem to me
to resemble those who have long looked at bad girls dancing naked: your
souls themselves dance!
In you, you higher men, there must be more of that which the magician
calls his evil spirit of magic and deceit: - we must indeed be different.
And truly, we spoke and thought long enough together ere. Zarathustra
came home to his cave, for me not to be unaware that we are different.
We seek different things even here aloft, you and I. For I seek more security;
on that account have I come to Zarathustra. For he is still the most
steadfast tower and will-
-Today, when everything totters, when all the earth quakes. You,
however, when I see what eyes you make, it almost seems to me that you
234
seek more insecurity,
-More horror, more danger, more earthquake. you long (it almost
seems so to me - forgive my presumption, you higher men)-
-You long for the worst and most dangerous life, which frightens me
most, - for the life of wild beasts, for forests, caves, steep mountains and
labyrinthine gorges.
And it is not those who lead out of danger that please you best, but
those who lead you away from all paths, the misleaders. But if such
longing in you be actual, it seems to me nevertheless to be impossible.
For fear - that is man's original and fundamental feeling; through fear
everything is explained, original sin and original virtue. Through fear
there grew also my virtue, that is to say: Science.
For fear of wild animals - that has been longest fostered in man, inclusive
of the animal which he conceals and fears in himself: - Zarathustra
calls it 'the beast inside.'
Such prolonged ancient fear, at last become subtle, spiritual and intellectual
- at present, me thinks, it is called Science."-
Thus spoke the conscientious one; but Zarathustra, who had just come
back into his cave and had heard and divined the last discourse, threw a
handful of roses to the conscientious one, and laughed on account of his
"truths." "Why!" he exclaimed, "what did I hear just now? Truly, it seems
to me, you are a fool, or else I myself am one: and quietly and quickly
will I Put your 'truth' upside down.
For fear - is an exception with us. Courage, however, and adventure,
and delight in the uncertain, in the unattempted - courage seems to me
the entire primitive history of man.
The wildest and most courageous animals has he envied and robbed of
all their virtues: thus only did he become - man.
This courage, at last become subtle, spiritual and intellectual, this human
courage, with eagle's pinions and serpent's wisdom: this, it seems to
me, is called at present-"
"Zarathustra!" cried all of them there assembled, as if with one voice,
and burst out at the same time into a great laughter; there arose,
however, from them as it were a heavy cloud. Even the magician
laughed, and said wisely: "Well! It is gone, my evil spirit!
And did I not myself warn you against it when I said that it was a deceiver,
a lying and deceiving spirit?
Especially when it shows itself naked. But what can I do with regard to
its tricks! Have I created it and the world?
Well! Let us be good again, and of good cheer! And although
235
Zarathustra looks with evil eye - just see him! he dislikes me-:
-Ere night comes will he again learn to love and laud me; he cannot live
long without committing such follies.
He - loves his enemies: this art knows he better than anyone I have
seen. But he takes revenge for it - on his friends!"
Thus spoke the old magician, and the higher men applauded him; so
that Zarathustra went round, and mischievously and lovingly shook
hands with his friends, - like one who has to make amends and apologise
to everyone for something. When however he had thereby come to the
door of his cave, behold, then had he again a longing for the good air
outside, and for his animals, - and wished to steal out.
Part 4, (16) AMONG DAUGHTERS OF THE DESERT
1.
"GO NOT away!" said then the wanderer who called himself
Zarathustra's shadow, "abide with us - otherwise the old gloomy affliction
might again fall upon us.
Now has that old magician given us of his worst for our good, and Behold.
the good, pious pope there has tears in his eyes, and has quite embarked
again upon the sea of melancholy.
Those kings may well put on a good air before us still: for that have
they learned best of us all at present! Had they however no one to see
them, I wager that with them also the bad game would again commence,-
-The bad game of drifting clouds, of damp melancholy, of curtained
heavens, of stolen suns, of howling autumn-winds,
-The bad game of our howling and crying for help! Abide with us, O
Zarathustra! Here there is much concealed misery that wishes to speak,
much evening, much cloud, much damp air!
You have nourished us with strong food for men, and powerful proverbs:
do not let the weakly, womanly spirits attack us anew at dessert!
You alone make the air around you strong and clear. Did I ever find
anywhere on earth such good air as with you in your cave?
Many lands have I seen, my nose has learned to test and estimate many
kinds of air: but with you do my nostrils taste their greatest delight!
Unless it be, - unless it be-, do forgive an old recollection! Forgive me
236
an old after-dinner song, which I once composed among daughters of
the desert:-
For with them was there equally good, clear, Oriental air; there was I
furthest from cloudy, damp, melancholy Old-Europe!
Then did I love such Oriental maidens and other blue kingdoms of
heaven, over which hang no clouds and no thoughts.
You would not believe how charmingly they sat there, when they did
not dance, profound, but without thoughts, like little secrets, like
beribboned riddles, like dessert-nuts-
Many-hued and foreign, indeed! but without clouds: riddles which can
be guessed: to please such maidens I then composed an after-dinner
psalm."
Thus spoke the wanderer who called himself Zarathustra's shadow;
and before anyone answered him, he had seized the harp of the old magician,
crossed his legs, and looked calmly and sagely around him: - with
his nostrils, however, he inhaled the air slowly and questioningly, like
one who in new countries tastes new foreign air. Afterward he began to
sing with a kind of roaring.
2.
The deserts grow: woe him who does them hide!
-Ha!
Solemnly!
In effect solemnly!
A worthy beginning!
Afric manner, solemnly!
Of a lion worthy,
Or perhaps of a virtuous howl-monkey-
-But it's naught to you,
You friendly damsels dearly loved,
At whose own feet to me,
The first occasion,
To a European under palm-trees,
At seat is now granted. Selah.
Wonderful, truly!
Here do I sit now,
The desert close, and yet I am
So far still from the desert,
Even in naught yet deserted:
That is, I'm swallowed down
By this the smallest oasis-:
237
-It opened up just yawning,
Its loveliest mouth agape,
Most sweet-odoured of all mouthlets:
Then fell I right in,
Right down, right through - in 'mong you,
You friendly damsels dearly loved! Selah.
Hail! hail! to that whale, fishlike,
If it thus for its guest's convenience
Made things nice! - (you well know,
Surely, my learned allusion?)
Hail to its belly,
If it had e'er
A such loveliest oasis-belly
As this is: though however I doubt about it,
-With this come I out of Old-Europe,
That doubt'th more eagerly than does any
Elderly married woman.
May the Lord improve it!
Amen!
Here do I sit now,
In this the smallest oasis,
Like a date indeed,
Brown, quite sweet, gold-suppurating,
For rounded mouth of maiden longing,
But yet still more for youthful, maidlike,
Ice-cold and snow-white and incisory
Front teeth: and for such assuredly,
Pine the hearts all of ardent date-fruits. Selah.
To the there-named south-fruits now,
Similar, all-too-similar,
Do I lie here; by little
Flying insects
Round-sniffled and round-played,
And also by yet littler,
Foolisher, and peccabler
Wishes and phantasies,-
Environed by you,
You silent, presentientest
Maiden-kittens,
Dudu and Suleika,
238
-Round sphinxed, that into one word
I may crowd much feeling:
(Forgive me, O God,
All such speech-sinning!)
-Sit I here the best of air sniffling,
Paradisal air, truly,
Bright and buoyant air, golden-mottled,
As goodly air as ever
From lunar orb downfell-
Be it by hazard,
Or supervened it by arrogancy?
As the ancient poets relate it.
But doubter, I'm now calling it
In question: with this do I come indeed
Out of Europe,
That doubts more eagerly than does any
Elderly married woman.
May the Lord improve it!
Amen.
This the finest air drinking,
With nostrils out-swelled like goblets,
Lacking future, lacking remembrances,
Thus do I sit here, you
Friendly damsels dearly loved,
And look at the palm-tree there,
How it, to a dance-girl, like,
does bow and bend and on its haunches bob,
-One does it too, when one views it long!-
To a dance-girl like, who as it seems to me,
Too long, and dangerously persistent,
Always, always, just on single leg has stood?
-Then forgot she thereby, as it seem to me,
The other leg?
For vainly I, at least,
Did search for the amissing
Fellow-jewel
-Namely, the other leg-
In the sanctified precincts,
Nigh her very dearest, very tenderest,
Flapping and fluttering and flickering skirting.
239
Yes, if you should, you beauteous friendly ones,
Quite take my word:
She hath, Alas. lost it!
Hu! Hu! Hu! Hu! Hu!
It is away!
For ever away!
The other leg!
Oh, pity for that loveliest other leg!
Where may it now tarry, all-forsaken weeping?
The lonesomest leg?
In fear perhaps before a
Furious, yellow, blond and curled
Leonine monster? Or perhaps even
Gnawed away, nibbled badly-
Most wretched, woeful! woeful! nibbled badly! Selah.
Oh, weep you not,
Gentle spirits!
Weep you not, you
Date-fruit spirits! Milk-bosoms!
You sweetwood-heart
Purselets!
Weep you no more,
Pallid Dudu!
Be a man, Suleika! Bold! Bold!
-Or else should there perhaps
Something strengthening, heart-strengthening,
Here most proper be?
Some inspiring text?
Some solemn exhortation?-
Ha! Up now! honour!
Moral honour! European honour!
Blow again, continue,
Bellows-box of virtue!
Ha!
Once more your roaring,
Your moral roaring!
As a virtuous lion
Nigh the daughters of deserts roaring!
-For virtue's out-howl,
You very dearest maidens,
240
Is more than every
European fervour, European hot-hunger!
And now do I stand here,
As European,
I can't be different, God's help to me!
Amen!
The deserts grow: woe him who does them hide!
Part 4, (17) THE AWAKENING
1.
AFTER the song of the wanderer and shadow, the cave became all at
once full of noise and laughter: and since the assembled guests all spoke
simultaneously, and even the ass, encouraged thereby, no longer remained
silent, a little aversion and scorn for his visitors came over
Zarathustra, although he rejoiced at their gladness. For it seemed to him
a sign of convalescence. So he slipped out into the open air and spoke to
his animals.
"where has their distress now gone?" said he, and already did he himself
feel relieved of his petty disgust - "with me, it seems that they have
unlearned their cries of distress!
-Though, Alas. not yet their crying." And Zarathustra stopped his ears,
for just then did the YE-A of the ass mix strangely with the noisy jubilation
of those higher men.
"They are merry," he began again, "and who knows? perhaps at their
host's expense; and if they have learned of me to laugh, still it is not my
laughter they have learned.
But what matter about that! They are old people: they recover in their
own way, they laugh in their own way; my ears have already endured
worse and have not become peevish.
This day is a victory: he already yields, he flies, the spirit of gravity, my
old arch-enemy! How well this day is about to end, which began so
badly and gloomily!
And it is about to end. Already comes the evening: over the sea rids it
hither, the good rider! How it bobs, the blessed one, the home-returning
one, in its purple saddles!
The sky gazes brightly thereon, the world lies deep. Oh, all you strange
241
ones who have come to me, it is already worthwhile to have lived with
me!"
Thus spoke Zarathustra. And again came the cries and laughter of the
higher men out of the cave: then began he anew:
"They bite at it, my bait takes, there departs also from them their enemy,
the spirit of gravity. Now do they learn to laugh at themselves: do I
hear rightly?
My virile food takes effect, my strong and savoury sayings: and truly, I
did not nourish them with flatulent vegetables! But with warrior-food,
with conqueror-food: new desires did I awaken.
New hopes are in their arms and legs, their hearts expand. They find
new words, soon will their spirits breathe wantonness.
Such food may sure enough not be proper for children, nor even for
longing girls old and young. One persuades their bowels otherwise; I am
not their physician and teacher.
The disgust departs from these higher men; well! that is my victory. In
my domain they become assured; all stupid shame flies away; they
empty themselves.
They empty their hearts, good times return to them, they keep holiday
and ruminate, - they become thankful.
That do I take as the best sign: they become thankful. Not long will it
be ere they devise festivals, and put up memorials to their old joys.
They are convalescents!" Thus spoke Zarathustra joyfully to his heart
and gazed outward; his animals, however, pressed up to him, and honoured
his happiness and his silence.
2.
All on a sudden however, Zarathustra's ear was frightened: for the
cave which had thus far been full of noise and laughter, became all at
once still as death; - his nose, however, smelt a sweet-scented vapour
and incense-odour, as if from burning pine-cones.
"What happens? What are they about?" he asked himself, and stole up
to the entrance, that he might be able unobserved to see his guests. But
wonder upon wonder! what was he then obliged to behold with his own
eyes!
"They have all of them become pious again, they pray, they are mad!" -
said he, and was astonished beyond measure. And indeed! all these
higher men, the two kings, the pope out of service, the evil magician, the
voluntary beggar, the wanderer and shadow, the old soothsayer, the
spiritually conscientious one, and the ugliest man - they all lay on their
knees like children and credulous old women, and worshipped the ass.
242
And just then began the ugliest man to gurgle and snort, as if something
unutterable in him tried to find expression; when, however, he had actually
found words, Behold. it was a pious, strange litany in praise of the
adored and censed ass. And the litany sounded thus:
Amen! And glory and honour and wisdom and thanks and praise and
strength be to our God, from everlasting to everlasting!
-The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.
He carried our burdens, he has taken upon him the form of a servant,
he is patient of heart and never says No; and he who loves his God chastises
him.
-The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.
He speaks not: except that he ever says yes to the world which he created:
thus does he extol his world. It is his artfulness that speaks not:
thus is he rarely found wrong.
-The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.
Uncomely goes he through the world. Grey is the favourite colour in
which he wraps his virtue. has he spirit, then does he conceal it; every
one, however, believes in his long ears.
-The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.
What hidden wisdom it is to wear long ears, and only to say yes and
never No! has he not created the world in his own image, namely, as stupid
as possible?
-The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.
You go straight and crooked ways; it concerns you little what seems
straight or crooked to us men. Beyond good and evil is your domain. It is
your innocence not to know what innocence is.
-The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.
Behold. how you spurn none from you, neither beggars nor kings. you
suffer little children to come to you, and when the bad boys decoy you,
then say you simply, YE-A.
-The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.
You love she-asses and fresh figs, you are no food-despiser. A thistle
tickles your heart when you chance to be hungry. There is the wisdom of
a God therein.
-The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.
243
Part 4, (18) THE ASS-FESTIVAL
1.
AT THIS place in the litany, however, Zarathustra could no longer control
himself; he himself cried out YE-A, louder even than the ass, and
sprang into the midst of his maddened guests. "Whatever are you about,
you grown-up children?" he exclaimed, pulling up the praying ones
from the ground. "Alas, if anyone else, except Zarathustra, had seen you:
Every one would think you the worst blasphemers, or the most very
foolish old women, with your new belief!
And you yourself, you old pope, how is it in accordance with you, to
adore an ass in such a manner as God?"-
"O Zarathustra," answered the pope, "forgive me, but in divine matters
I am more enlightened even than you. And it is right that it should be so.
Better to adore God so, in this form, than in no form at all! Think over
this saying, my exalted friend: you will readily divine that in such a saying
there is wisdom.
He who said 'God is a Spirit' - made the greatest stride and slide thus
far made on earth towards unbelief: such a dictum is not easily amended
again on earth!
My old heart leaps and bounds because there is still something to adore
on earth. Forgive it, O Zarathustra, to an old, pious pontiff-heart!-"
-"And you," said Zarathustra to the wanderer and shadow, "you call
and think yourself a free spirit? And you here practise such idolatry and
hierolatry?
Worse truly, do you here than with your bad brown girls, you bad,
new believer!"
"It is sad enough," answered the wanderer and shadow, "you are right:
but how can I help it! The old God lives again, O Zarathustra, you may
say what you wilt.
The ugliest man is to blame for it all: he has reawakened him. And if he
say that he once killed him, with Gods death is always just a prejudice."
-"And you," said Zarathustra, "you bad old magician, what didst you
do! Who ought to believe any longer in you in this free age, when you
believe in such divine donkeyism?
It was a stupid thing that you didst; how could you, a shrewd man, do
such a stupid thing!"
"O Zarathustra," answered the shrewd magician, "you are right, it was
a stupid thing, - it was also repugnant to me."
-"And you even," said Zarathustra to the spiritually conscientious one,
"consider, and put your finger to your nose! does nothing go against
244
your conscience here? Is your spirit not too cleanly for this praying and
the fumes of those devotees?"
"There is something therein," said the spiritually conscientious one, and
put his finger to his nose, "there is something in this spectacle which
even does good to my conscience.
Perhaps I dare not believe in God: certain it is however, that God seems
to me most worthy of belief in this form.
God is said to be eternal, according to the testimony of the most pious:
he who has so much time takes his time. As slow and as stupid as possible:
thereby can such a one nevertheless go very far.
And he who has too much spirit might well become infatuated with
stupidity and folly. Think of yourself, O Zarathustra!
You yourself - truly! even you could well become an ass through superabundance
of wisdom.
does not the true sage willingly walk on the most crooked paths? The
evidence teaches it, O Zarathustra, - your own evidence!"
-"And you yourself, finally," said Zarathustra, and turned towards the
ugliest man, who still lay on the ground stretching up his arm to the ass
(for he gave it wine to drink). "Say, you nondescript, what have you been
about!
You seem to me transformed, your eyes glow, the mantle of the sublime
covers your ugliness: what didst you do?
Is it then true what they say, that you have again awakened him? And
why? Was he not for good reasons killed and made away with?
You yourself seem to me awakened: what didst you do? why didst you
turn round? Why didst you get converted? Speak, you nondescript!"
"O Zarathustra," answered the ugliest man, "you are a rogue!
Whether he yet lives, or again lives, or is thoroughly dead - which of us
both knows that best? I ask you.
One thing however do I know, - from yourself did I learn it once, O
Zarathustra: he who wants to kill most thoroughly, laughs.
'Not by wrath but by laughter does one kill' - thus spoke you once, O
Zarathustra, you hidden one, you destroyer without wrath, you dangerous
saint, - you are a rogue!"
2.
Then, however, did it come to pass that Zarathustra, astonished at such
merely roguish answers, jumped back to the door of his cave, and turning
towards all his guests, cried out with a strong voice:
"O you wags, all of you, you buffoons! Why do you dissemble and disguise
yourselves before me!
245
How the hearts of all of you convulsed with delight and wickedness,
because you had at last become again like little children - namely, pious,-
-Because you at last did again as children do - namely, prayed, folded
your hands and said 'good God'!
But now leave, I pray you, this nursery, my own cave, where today all
childishness is carried on. Cool down, here outside, your hot child-wantonness
and heart-tumult!
To be sure: except you become as little children you shall not enter into
that kingdom of heaven." (And Zarathustra pointed aloft with his
hands.)
"But we do not at all want to enter into the kingdom of heaven: we
have become men, - so we want the kingdom of earth."
3.
And once more began Zarathustra to speak. "O my new friends," said
he, - "you strange ones, you higher men, how well do you now please
me,-
-Since you have again become joyful! you have, truly, all blossomed
forth: it seems to me that for such flowers as you, new festivals are
required.
-A little valiant nonsense, some divine service and ass-festival, some
old joyful Zarathustra fool, some blusterer to blow your souls bright.
Forget not this night and this ass-festival, you higher men! That did
you devise when with me, that do I take as a good omen, - such things
only the convalescents devise!
And should you celebrate it again, this ass-festival, do it from love to
yourselves, do it also from love to me! And in remembrance of me!"
Thus spoke Zarathustra.
Part 4, (19) THE DRUNKEN SONG
1.
MEANWHILE one after another had gone out into the open air, and into
the cool, thoughtful night; Zarathustra himself, however, led the ugliest
man by the hand, that he might show him his night-world, and the
great round moon, and the silvery water-falls near his cave. There they at
last stood still beside one another; all of them old people, but with comforted,
brave hearts, and astonished in themselves that it was so well
246
with them on earth; the mystery of the night, however, came closer and
closer to their hearts. And anew Zarathustra thought to himself: "Oh,
how well do they now please me, these higher men!" - but he did not say
it aloud, for he respected their happiness and their silence.-
Then, however, there happened that which in this astonishing long day
was most astonishing: the ugliest man began once more and for the last
time to gurgle and snort, and when he had at length found expression,
Behold. there sprang a question plump and plain out of his mouth, a
good, deep, clear question, which moved the hearts of all who listened to
him.
"My friends, all of you," said the ugliest man, "what think you? For the
sake of this day - I am for the first time content to have lived my entire
life.
And that I testify so much is still not enough for me. It is worthwhile
living on the earth: one day, one festival with Zarathustra, has taught me
to love the earth.
'Was that - life?' will I say to death. 'Well! Once more!'
My friends, what think you? Will you not, like me, say to death: 'Was
that - life? For the sake of Zarathustra, well! Once more!'" - -
Thus spoke the ugliest man; it was not, however, far from midnight.
And what took place then, think you? As soon as the higher men heard
his question, they became all at once conscious of their transformation
and convalescence, and of him who was the cause thereof: then did they
rush up to Zarathustra, thanking, honouring, caressing him, and kissing
his hands, each in his own peculiar way; so that some laughed and some
wept. The old soothsayer, however, danced with delight; and though he
was then, as some narrators suppose, full of sweet wine, he was certainly
still fuller of sweet life, and had renounced all weariness. There are even
those who narrate that the ass then danced: for not in vain had the ugliest
man previously given it wine to drink. That may be the case, or it
may be otherwise; and if in truth the ass did not dance that evening,
there nevertheless happened then greater and rarer wonders than the
dancing of an ass would have been. In short, as the proverb of Zarathustra
says: "What does it matter!"
2.
When, however, this took place with the ugliest man, Zarathustra
stood there like one drunken: his glance dulled, his tongue faltered and
his feet staggered. And who could divine what thoughts then passed
through Zarathustra's soul? Apparently, however, his spirit retreated
and fled in advance and was in remote distances, and as it were
247
"wandering on high mountain-ridges," as it stands written, "between two
seas,
-Wandering between the past and the future as a heavy cloud." Gradually,
however, while the higher men held him in their arms, he came
back to himself a little, and resisted with his hands the crowd of the honouring
and caring ones; but he did not speak. All at once, however, he
turned his head quickly, for he seemed to hear something: then laid he
his finger on his mouth and said: "Come!"
And immediately it became still and mysterious round about; from the
depth however there came up slowly the sound of a clock-bell. Zarathustra
listened to this, like the higher men; then, however, laid he his finger
on his mouth the second time, and said again: "Come! Come! It is getting
on to midnight!" - and his voice had changed. But still he had not moved
from the spot. Then it became yet stiller and more mysterious, and
everything listened, even the ass, and Zarathustra's noble animals, the
eagle and the serpent, - likewise the cave of Zarathustra and the big cool
moon, and the night itself. Zarathustra, however, laid his hand upon his
mouth for the third time, and said:
Come! Come! Come! Let us now wander! It is the hour: let us wander
into the night!
3.
You higher men, it is getting on to midnight: then will I say something
into your ears, as that old clock-bell says it into my ear,-
-As mysteriously, as frightfully, and as cordially as that midnight
clock-bell speaks it to me, which has experienced more than one man:
-Which has already counted the smarting throbbings of your fathers'
hearts - ah! ah! how it sighs! how it laughs in its dream! the old, deep,
deep midnight!
Hush! Hush! Then is there many a thing heard which may not be heard
by day; now however, in the cool air, when even all the tumult of your
hearts has become still,-
-Now does it speak, now is it heard, now does it steal into overwakeful,
nocturnal souls: ah! ah! how the midnight sighs! how it laughs in its
dream!
-Hear you not how it mysteriously, frightfully, and cordially speaks to
you, the old deep, deep midnight?
O man, take heed!
4.
Woe to me! where has time gone? Have I not sunk into deep wells? The
world sleeps-
248
Ah! Ah! The dog howls, the moon shins. Rather will I die, rather will I
die, than say to you what my midnight-heart now thinks.
Already have I died. It is all over. Spider, why spin you around me?
will you have blood? Ah! Ah! The dew falls, the hour comes-
-The hour in which I frost and freeze, which asks and asks and asks:
"Who has sufficient courage for it?
-Who is to be master of the world? Who is going to say: Thus shall you
flow, you great and small streams!"
-The hour approaches: O man, you higher man, take heed! this talk is
for fine ears, for your ears - what says deep midnight's voice indeed?
5.
It carries me away, my soul dances. Day's-work! Day's-work! Who is to
be master of the world?
The moon is cool, the wind is still. Ah! Ah! Have you already flown
high enough? you have danced: a leg, nevertheless, is not a wing.
You good dancers, now is all delight over: wine has become lees, every
cup has become brittle, the sepulchres mutter.
You have not flown high enough: now do the sepulchres mutter: "Free
the dead! Why is it so long night? does not the moon make us drunken?"
You higher men, free the sepulchres, awaken the corpses! Ah, why
does the worm still burrow? There approaches, there approaches, the
hour,-
-There booms the clock-bell, there thrills still the heart, there burrows
still the wood-worm, the heart-worm. Ah! Ah! The world is deep!
6.
Sweet lyre! Sweet lyre! I love your tone, your drunken, ranunculine
tone! - how long, how far has come to me your tone, from the distance,
from the ponds of love!
You old clock-bell, you sweet lyre! Every pain has torn your heart,
father-pain, fathers'-pain, forefathers'-pain; your speech has become
ripe,-
-Ripe like the golden autumn and the afternoon, like my hermit heart -
now say you: The world itself has become ripe, the grape turns brown,
-Now does it wish to die, to die of happiness. you higher men, do you
not feel it? There wells up mysteriously an odour,
-A perfume and odour of eternity, a rosy-blessed, brown, gold-wineodour
of old happiness.
-Of drunken midnight-death happiness, which sings: the world is
deep, and deeper than the day could read!
7.
249
Leave me alone! Leave me alone! I am too pure for you. Touch me not!
has not my world just now become perfect?
My skin is too pure for your hands. Leave me alone, you dull, doltish,
stupid day! Is not the midnight brighter?
The purest are to be masters of the world, the least known, the
strongest, the midnight-souls, who are brighter and deeper than any day.
O day, you grope for me? you feel for my happiness? For you am I rich,
lonesome, a treasure-pit, a gold chamber?
O world, you want me? Am I worldly for you? Am I spiritual for you?
Am I divine for you? But day and world, you are too coarse,-
-Have cleverer hands, grasp after deeper happiness, after deeper unhappiness,
grasp after some God; grasp not after me:
-My unhappiness, my happiness is deep, you strange day, but yet am I
no God, no God's-hell: deep is its woe.
8.
God's woe is deeper, you strange world! Grasp at God's woe, not at
me! What am I! A drunken sweet lyre,-
-A midnight-lyre, a bell-frog, which no one understands, but which
must speak before deaf ones, you higher men! For you do not understand
me!
Gone! Gone! O youth! O noontide! O afternoon! Now have come evening
and night and midnight, - the dog howls, the wind:
-Is the wind not a dog? It whines, it barks, it howls. Ah! Ah! how she
sighs! how she laughs, how she wheezes and pants, the midnight!
How she just now speaks soberly, this drunken poetess! has she perhaps
overdrunk her drunkenness? has she become overawake? does she
ruminate?
-Her woe does she ruminate over, in a dream, the old, deep midnight -
and still more her joy. For joy, although woe be deep, joy is deeper still
than grief can be.
9.
You grape-vine! Why do you praise me? Have I not cut your! I am
cruel, you bleed-: what means your praise of my drunken cruelty?
"Whatever has become perfect, everything mature - wants to die!" so
say you. Blessed, blessed be the vintner's knife! But everything immature
wants to live: Alas.
Woe says: "Hence! Go! Away, you woe!" But everything that suffers
wants to live, that it may become mature and lively and longing,
-Longing for the further, the higher, the brighter. "I want heirs," so says
everything that suffers, "I want children, I do not want myself,"-
250
Joy, however, does not want heirs, it does not want children, - joy
wants itself, it wants eternity, it wants recurrence, it wants everything
eternally-like-itself.
Woe says: "Break, bleed, you heart! Wander, you leg! you wing, fly!
Onward! upward! you pain!" Well! Cheer up! O my old heart: Woe says:
"Hence! Go!"
10.
You higher men, what think you? Am I a soothsayer? Or a dreamer? Or
a drunkard? Or a dream-reader? Or a midnight-bell?
Or a drop of dew? Or a fume and fragrance of eternity? Hear you it
not? Smell you it not? Just now has my world become perfect, midnight
is also mid-day,-
Pain is also a joy, curse is also a blessing, night is also a sun, - go away!
or you will learn that a sage is also a fool.
Said you ever yes to one joy? O my friends, then said you yes also to all
woe. All things are enlinked, enlaced and enamoured,-
-Wanted you ever once to come twice; said you ever: "you please me,
happiness! Instant! Moment!" then wanted you all to come back again!
-All anew, all eternal, all enlinked, enlaced and enamoured, Oh, then
did you love the world,-
-You eternal ones, you love it eternally and for all time: and also to woe
do you say: Hence! Go! but come back! For joys all want - eternity!
11.
All joy wants the eternity of all things, it wants honey, it wants lees, it
wants drunken midnight, it wants graves, it wants grave-tears' consolation,
it wants gilded evening-red-
-What does not joy want! it is thirstier, heartier, hungrier, more frightful,
more mysterious, than all woe: it wants itself, it bits into itself, the
ring's will writhes in it,-
-It wants love, it wants hate, it is over-rich, it bestows, it throws away,
it begs for someone to take from it, it thanks the taker, it would rather be
hated,-
-So rich is joy that it thirsts for woe, for hell, for hate, for shame, for the
lame, for the world, - for this world, Oh, you know it indeed!
You higher men, for you does it long, this joy, this irrepressible, blessed
joy - for your woe, you failures! For failures, longs all eternal joy.
For joys all want themselves, therefore do they also want grief! O happiness,
O pain! Oh break, you heart! you higher men, do learn it, that
joys want eternity.
-Joys want the eternity of all things, they want deep, profound eternity!
251
12.
Have you now learned my song? Have you divined what it would say?
Well! Cheer up! you higher men, sing now my roundelay!
Sing now yourselves the song, the name of which is "Once more," the
signification of which is "Unto all eternity!" - sing, you higher men,
Zarathustra's roundelay!
O man! Take heed!
What says deep midnight's voice indeed?
"I slept my sleep-,
"From deepest dream I've woke, and plead:-
"The world is deep,
"And deeper than the day could read.
"Deep is its woe-,
"Joy - deeper still than grief can be:
"Woe says: Hence! Go!
"But joys all want eternity-,
"-Want deep, profound eternity!"
Part 4, (20) THE SIGN
IN THE morning, however, after this night, Zarathustra jumped up
from his couch, and, having girded his loins, he came out of his cave
glowing and strong, like a morning sun coming out of gloomy mountains.
"you great star," spoke he, as he had spoken once before, "you deep eye
of happiness, what would be all your happiness if you had not those for
whom you shine!
And if they remained in their chambers whilst you are already awake,
and come and bestow and distribute, how would your proud modesty
upbraid for it!
Well! they still sleep, these higher men, whilst I am awake: they are not
my proper companions! Not for them do I wait here in my mountains.
At my work I want to be, at my day: but they understand not what are
the signs of my morning, my step - is not for them the awakening-call.
They still sleep in my cave; their dream still drinks at my drunken
songs. The audient ear for me - the obedient ear, is yet lacking in their
limbs."
252
-This had Zarathustra spoken to his heart when the sun arose: then
looked he inquiringly aloft, for he heard above him the sharp call of his
eagle. "Well!" called he upwards, "thus is it pleasing and proper to me.
my animals are awake, for I am awake.
My eagle is awake, and like me honours the sun. With eagle-talons
does it grasp at the new light. you are my proper animals; I love you.
But still do I lack my proper men!" -
Thus spoke Zarathustra; then, however, it happened that all on a sudden
he became aware that he was flocked around and fluttered around,
as if by innumerable birds, - the whizzing of so many wings, however,
and the crowding around his head was so great that he shut his eyes.
And truly, there came down upon him as it were a cloud, like a cloud of
arrows which pours upon a new enemy. But behold, here it was a cloud
of love, and showered upon a new friend.
"What happens to me?" thought Zarathustra in his astonished heart,
and slowly seated himself on the big stone which lay close to the exit
from his cave. But while he grasped about with his hands, around him,
above him and below him, and repelled the tender birds, behold, there
then happened to him something still stranger: for he grasped thereby
unawares into a mass of thick, warm, shaggy hair; at the same time,
however, there sounded before him a roar, - a long, soft lion-roar.
"The sign comes," said Zarathustra, and a change came over his heart.
And in truth, when it turned clear before him, there lay a yellow, powerful
animal at his feet, resting its head on his knee, - unwilling to leave
him out of love, and doing like a dog which again finds its old master.
The doves, however, were no less eager with their love than the lion; and
whenever a dove whisked over its nose, the lion shook its head and
wondered and laughed.
When all this went on Zarathustra spoke only a word: "My children are
close, my children"-, then he became quite mute. His heart, however, was
loosed, and from his eyes there dropped down tears and fell upon his
hands. And he took no further notice of anything, but sat there motionless,
without repelling the animals further. Then flew the doves to and
fro, and perched on his shoulder, and caressed his white hair, and did
not tire of their tenderness and joyousness. The strong lion, however,
licked always the tears that fell on Zarathustra's hands, and roared and
growled shyly. Thus did these animals do.-
All this went on for a long time, or a short time: for properly speaking,
there is no time on earth for such things-. Meanwhile, however, the higher
men had awakened in Zarathustra's cave, and marshalled themselves
253
for a procession to go to meet Zarathustra, and give him their morning
greeting: for they had found when they awakened that he no longer tarried
with them. When, however, they reached the door of the cave and
the noise of their steps had preceded them, the lion started violently; it
turned away all at once from Zarathustra, and roaring wildly, sprang towards
the cave. The higher men, however, when they heard the lion
roaring, cried all aloud as with one voice, fled back and vanished in an
instant.
Zarathustra himself, however, stunned and strange, rose from his seat,
looked around him, stood there astonished, inquired of his heart, bethought
himself, and remained alone. "What did I hear?" said he at last,
slowly, "what happened to me just now?"
But soon there came to him his recollection, and he took in at a glance
all that had taken place between yesterday and to-day. "Here is indeed
the stone," said he, and stroked his beard, "on it sat I yester-morn; and
here came the soothsayer to me, and here heard I first the cry which I
heard just now, the great cry of distress.
O you higher men, your distress was it that the old soothsayer foretold
to me yester-morn,-
-Unto your distress did he want to seduce and tempt me: 'O Zarathustra,'
said he to me, 'I come to seduce you to your last sin.'
To my last sin?" cried Zarathustra, and laughed angrily at his own
words: "what has been reserved for me as my last sin?"
-And once more Zarathustra became absorbed in himself, and sat
down again on the big stone and meditated. Suddenly he sprang up,-
"Fellow-suffering! Fellow-suffering with the higher men!" he cried out,
and his countenance changed into brass. "Well! That - has had its time!
My suffering and my fellow-suffering - what matter about them! Do I
then strive after happiness? I strive after my work!
Well! The lion has come, my children are close, Zarathustra has grown
ripe, my hour has come:-
This is my morning, my day begins: arise now, arise, you great noontide!"
- -
Thus spoke Zarathustra and left his cave, glowing and strong, like a
morning sun coming out of gloomy mountains.
THE END
Return to First Page
254
255
Appendices
A - Timeline Biography
APPENDIX A
TIMELINE BIOGRAPHY
Youth (1844-1869)
AGE:0 / 2 / 4 / 5 / 14 / 20 / 21 / 23
Professor (1869-1879)
AGE:24 / 25 / 26 / 27 / 28 / 29 / 30 / 31 / 32 / 33 / 34
Years of Wandering (1880-1889)
AGE:35 / 36 / 37 / 38 / 39 / 40 / 41 / 42 / 43 / 44 / 44-54 / 55
Youth (1844-1869) Age
0 - October 15, 1844: Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche is born in the small
rural town of Rocken, Germany. His father and both grandfathers were
Lutheran ministers.
2 - His sister Elisabeth is born.
4 - His father dies at age 35.
5 - The family moves to nearby Naumburg.
14 - Nietzsche enters the famous Pforta High School.
20 - October: He starts studying theology at the University of Bonn but
by the second semester shifts to philology (the study of language and literary
texts)
Easter: He refuses to take communion which upsets his mother.
21 - October: Nietzsche transfers to the University of Leipzig to study
classical philology. A pianist and composer, Nietzsche also tries to study
music there.
By accident at a bookstore, he discovers the philosophy of Schopenhauer.
January: The renowned Professor A. Ritschl "discovers" the young
student and lavishly praises his possibilities as a future philologist. Nietzsche
says, "One day, I was suddenly a philologist" [3](part 2, sect. 9)
23 - Nietzsche enlists in an artillery regiment but later is discharged due
to injuries from riding a horse.
All during his Leipzig years, Nietzsche has doubts about philology,
seeing it only as a stepping stone to interesting philosophical problems.
256
Professor (1869-1879) Age
24 - November: Nietzsche has his first meeting with Richard Wagner, the
famous composer.
February: Not even finished with his doctorate, Nietzsche is amazed
to be appointed as Professor in Philology at Basel University through the
intervention of Ritschl. The pay is excellent but he soon laments, "What
does this wonderful luck  consist of? Sweat and effort  the stale milk
of the job's daily monotony."[4] (p.102)
April: Nietzsche renounces his German citizenship to become Swiss.
But because of a residency technicality he never becomes a Swiss citizen
and so remains officially stateless for the rest of his life.[5](1869)
In his inaugural university lecture Nietzsche reveals his radical view
that philology should be subservient to philosophy.
April to July: Nietzsche makes frequent visits to Wagner's home, becoming
almost 'one of the family'.
He has a heavy schedule teaching at the university and an associated
preparatory high school. He mostly teaches Greek and Roman classics.
September: Nietzsche becomes a vegetarian but he gives it up shortly
after an argument with Wagner about it.
25 - December: He plays "Santa Claus" for Wagner's [future] wife
Cosima, making numerous purchases in Basel.
January, February: He considers getting a dog as a pet but never does.
Wagner writes to his new friend, "I have at present nobody with whom I
can be as serious as with youapart from [my wife]"
June: Franz Overbeck, a professor of Theology at Basel, moves into the
same house as Nietzsche. Their close friendship lasts all of Nietzsche's
life.
August: He volunteers for the German side in the Franco-Prussian war.
The university gives him a leave of absence but because of Swiss neutrality
he can only be a medic. He becomes sick while tending to severely
wounded soldiers at the front and spends a month recovering at home.
26 - January: Nietzsche applies for a position as philosophy professor but
is unsuccessful.
April: His first book, The Birth of Tragedy, is ready for submission. The
book breaks from scholarly tradition by its exuberant style and by having
no footnotes referring to other sources.
27 - January: The Birth of Tragedy is published. The Wagners are very
enthusiastic about it but Ritschl calls it, "clever drunkenness".
March: Nietzsche's aspirations as a musical composer is set back by
257
criticism of his music by the conductor Hans Von Bulow.
May: An important philologist, Ulrich von Wilamowitz attacks the
Birth of Tragedy and in October students begin to avoid Nietzsche's
classes because of the controversy surrounding his book.
28 - December: Awkward visit by Ritschl who reports Nietzsche is becoming
unpopular at the university. February: Ritschl further embittered
by Nietzsche's wayward style and writings. Ritschl writes to a
friend, "But our Nietzsche!  that it certainly a very muddled chapter
it's remarkable how in that single man two souls live side by side. On the
one hand the most rigorous methodology of schooled, scientific research
on the other this phantastic-exaggerated, overly clever, reaching
into the incomprehensible, Wagnerian-Schopenhauerian artmysticism-
enthusiasm! What annoys me the most is his impiety
against his own mother, who nursed him at her breast: philology."
May: Nietzsche begins an intensive reading of books on natural science.
29 - December: More arguments and tension between Ritschl and Nietzsche.
February: Nietzsche continues to be plagued by ill health. Wagner says
that marriage is the key to Nietzsche recovering.
July: The faculty by a vote of 6 to 4 decides against admission of women
to doctoral programs. One of the faculty voting in favor of admission
is Nietzsche.
August: There are disagreements with Wagner. Cosima says, "In all, a
clear indication that Nietzsche is unable to "toe the line" as Wagner expects".
Vacation in Flims. He writes, "My health has been changeable, so
I hope the holidays will be restful and productive. For it is only when I
am producing something that I can be really healthy and feel well."
(H165)
30 - March-September: Nietzsche works on Schopenhauer as Educator
(Untimely Meditations III)
31 - January: For health reasons he is released from teaching at the local
High School. February: His illness also interrupts university teaching.
April: He proposes marriage to Mathilde Trampedach but she loves
someone else.
June: He requests a year's leave from the university. It is granted, with
full salary.
Summer: His close relationship with Wagner has all but ended. His
flight from Wagnerian anti-Semitism is extreme. Later, when Wagner
sends him a text of his latest opera, he remarks that he almost wishes his
258
Jewish admirer, Siegfried Lipiner would rewrite it.[4](p.195)
August: He is attracted to but resists a love affair with a married woman
from Paris, Louise Ott. [4] (p.189)
32 - October: He leaves with his new Jewish friend and scholar, Paul Ree
to join Albert Brenner and Malwida von Meysenbug as a community of
"free spirits" living in a villa in Sorrento, Italy. On the way he makes a
detour to visit Pisa with Isabella von Pahlen, a girl he had met on the
train. [4] (p.191)
November: Nietzsche's final meeting with Wagner in Sorrento.
January: The Sorrento community spends their days together, taking
walks, reading and working on their own projects. There is much discussion
about Nietzsche and whom he should marry. They see marriage as
helping to relieve his illness.
Early October: To help his eye condition doctors recommend "absolute
avoidance of reading and writing for many years." [4]
33 - March: He is relieved of his high school teaching responsibilities.
May: Human, All Too Human is published. Wagner attacks the book saying
it is influenced by Jewish thought. To Ree Nietzsche says, "All my
friends are now in agreement that my book was written by you: for
which I congratulate you on its authorship  Long live Reealism and
my good friend!"
34 - Autumn: Nietzsche's illness continues to plague him. His teaching
exhausts him.
March: Publication of Mixed Opinions and Maxims. As usual the sales of
the book are poor.
May: Submits resignation to the university on grounds of ill health. In
June the university expresses regret and thanks and he is awarded a pension
of 2/3 his regular salary. His friends discuss how he might get extra
financial support. He sells his furniture and his books are stored in
Zurich.
August-September: Despite his illness he keeps writing aphorisms for
his next book. He is helped by his new friend, Peter Gast.
About being a prestigious professor at the University of Basel he says,
"Ten years were behind me, during which, to tell the truth, the nourishment
of my spirit had been at a standstill, during which I had added not
a single useful fragment to my knowledge, in which I had forgotten
countless things in the pursuit of dusty scholarly odds and ends." ([3] p6
s3)
Years of Wandering (1880-1889) Age
259
35 - December: The Wanderer and His Shadow is published. His friends
praise the book but only 192 copies are sold.
March-June: With help from Gast, Nietzsche goes to live in Venice.
Gast reads to and takes diction from his bedridden friend.
36 - February: The Dawn is completed.
July: The Dawn is published. Nietzsche goes to Sils Maria, high in the
Swiss Alps. The idea for Zarathustra occurs to him there.
37- January-March: Material originally intended for The Dawn is developed
into The Gay Science.
He tries a typewriter, invented only 10 years earlier but it doesn't make
his task of writing easier and he gives it up.
March: Nietzsche boards a ship for Messina, which he likes but goes to
Rome 4 weeks later.
May: Nietzsche meets Lou Salome in Rome. She is perhaps the one woman
in his life that he has strong feelings for. Lou is young and adventurous.
She, Ree and Nietzsche talk and dream about living and studying
together in Paris. Lou, years later, says Nietzsche twice proposed marriage
to her, but recent biographers doubt it was true.[5] (1884) Ree too
has feelings for Lou and together with Nietzsche's jealous, prudish sister
Elizabeth, a real emotional mess is starting to develop.
August: The Gay Science is published. Lou and Elizabeth have a loud
bitter argument. Nietzsche is unaware of this. Lou gives him a beautiful
poem she wrote and he likes it so much he puts it to music and later publishes
it.
September: Plans are set for the "trinity" to go to Paris but at the last
minute everything falls apart. Nietzsche's mother, influenced by Elizabeth,
is violently opposed to Lou. Nietzsche learns of the hate between
Lou and Elizabeth.
October: There is a last meeting of the "trinity". By November Nietzsche
is definitely not going to Paris.
38 - November: Nietzsche spends a difficult month in Rapallo alone.
Through letters, relations between him and Ree and Lou worsen. He is
so upset with his mother and sister he won't even write to them. At
Christmas to his friend Overbeck he writes, "This last bite of life was the
hardest I've ever chewed "
January: Nietzsche swings between highs and lows. When his spirits
are high, in only ten days, he completes a clean copy of the first part of
Zarathustra.
February: Wagner dies. In a letter to a friend he says, "It was hard,
very hard, for six years to have to be the opponent of someone one has
260
honored and loved as I have loved Wagner"
Late February to May: Nietzsche is in a cheerful frame of mind, his
health improving. He renews writing to his mother and sister.
August: He asks to be able to hold lectures at the University of Leipzig
but is refused because of his views on Christianity.
June to September: He goes to Sils-Maria in the Alps. Writes the
second part of Zarathustra.
October: Elizabeth announces her engagement to the anti-Semite
Bernhard Forster.
39 He breaks again with his sister. In a letter to Overbeck "The cursed
anti-Semitism is the cause of a radical break between me and my sister
"[5] 1884
He goes to Genoa. His health declines and he moves to Nice in search
of good weather.
January: Zarathustra Book 2 is published. Like Book 1, it sells very
poorly.
Acquaintance with Resa von Schirnhofer who says, "Nietzsche once gave
me the good advice to keep paper and pencil on hand at night, as he
himself did, since at night we are often visited by rare thoughts, which
we should record immediately for by morning we can usually not find
them again  "[6] (p.148)
40 June to mid-September: He meets Louise Rder-Wiederhold who
transcribes a number of aphorisms by his dictation. Most of these will be
used in Beyond Good and Evil. In a letter, Nietzsche wonders if Louise can
long stand his "anti-democratic" ideas and his aphorisms about women.[
5] (1885) Difficulties start with his anti-Semitic publisher, Schmeitzner
who refuses to publish Zarathustra 4. In a letter to Overbeck:
"my writings lie completely buried and unexhumeable in this anti-Semitic
hole (meaning Schmeitzner)"[5](1885)
41 - November: Nietzsche is delighted to encounter an astronomer, a
"snow white old man," making observations who recites passages from
Human, All Too Human.[5] (1885)
June: He begins Beyond Good and Evil.
August: He spends time with Meta von Salis, Emily Flynn, Helen Zimmern.
42 - November: Accidentally "discovers" Dostoevsky. " my joy was extraordinary:
I would have to go back to my acquaintance with Stendhal's
Rouge et Noir to recall the same degree of delight"[5](1886)
January: He completes Beyond Good and Evil. August: The book is published.
261
October: Nietzsche writes the fifth book of The Gay Science.
43 -
November: Nietzsche sends a copy of Genealogy of Morals to Georg
Brandes, the influential and famous Danish literary critic, who replies,
"you are without doubt the most exciting of German writers."[4] (p.314).
A lively correspondence ensues.
Early April: Nietzsche discovers Turin and is delighted with the dry
weather, the people, the cuisine and the beautiful, "quiet, aristocratic" atmosphere
of the city.
April: Brandes writes that he had been "seized with a kind of anger
that no one in Scandinavia knows of you, and had quickly decided to
make you famous all in one blow". He will give a series of open lectures
at the University of Copenhagen on Nietzsche's philosophy. The five
lectures are a great success and at the end Brandes is given a ovation by a
large audience. In May he tells Nietzsche, "Your name now, I can say
without exaggeration, is very popular in all intelligent circles of Copenhagen
and known, at least in all of Scandinavia.[7] (p.289) Later in the
year Brandes "completely wins over" the influential Swedish writer
August Strindberg, who tells Nietzsche, "I am ending all my letters,
'Read Nietzsche' ". [4] (p.333)
Nietzsche is delighted by all this. The rest of the year becomes one of
his happiest and most productive years. His health and energy seem
much better. He senses approaching fame. He writes 5 books where his
usual pace is one per year. Turin continues to enchant him especially
after September.
May: He begins work on The Wagner Case.
June: Nietzsche leaves for Sils Maria. He works on Twilight of the Idols.
September: He finishes The Wagner Case and the Twilight of the Idols and
begins work on the The Antichrist.
44 -
October: On the 15th, his 44th birthday, he starts writing his autobiography
and commentary on his writings entitled Ecce Homo.
End of November: The Antichrist is all but finished.
December 12-15 Nietzsche quickly assembles a short book of previous
passages called Nietzsche Contro Wagner.
End of December: Ecce Homo is almost completed.
January 3: On a street in Turin, Italy, Nietzsche collapses unconscious
after tearfully flinging his arms around a horse that was being beaten by
its owner. Awaking later in his room, he writes and sends off several
strange, clowning letters. He is brought to a clinic in Basel. At first his
262
friends think he would recover. Even a year later Gast says, "He did not
look very ill. I almost had the impression that his mental disturbance
consists in no more than a heightening of the humorous antics he used to
put on for an intimate circle of friends.'  Gast could see he didn't want
to be cured : "It seemed - horrible though this is - as if Nietzsche were
merely feigning madness, as if he were glad for it to have ended this
way". This tallies with Overbeck's feeling when he came to Jena in February:
"I cannot escape the ghastly suspicion  that his madness is simulated."
[4] (p. 340-41)
44-54 - His mental and physical condition progressively worsens leaving
him helpless and unable to write coherently.
55 - August 25, 1900: Nietzsche dies.
REFERENCES
1. Twilight of the Idols, Part 2, Section 26
2. Basic Writings of Nietzsche, p. 657
3. Ecce Homo
4. Nietzsche: A Critical Life, by Ronald Hayman
5. Nietzsche Chronicle Timeline by Malcom Brown at
http://www.dartmouth.edu/~fnchron/index.html
6. Conversations with Nietzsche, Sandler L. Gilman, Translated by David
J. Parent, 1987
7. The Cambridge Companion to Nietzsche, by Bernd Magnus, Kathleen
M Higgins
8. The Birth of Tragedy, 1886 Preface
9. The Gay Science, 1886 Preface
10. The Antichrist, Preface
263
B - Nietzsche's Comments on his Books
APPENDIX B
NIETZSCHE'S COMMENTS ON HIS BOOKS
All the comments below either come from Nietzsche's autobiography, Ecce
Homo, or from prefaces he wrote to his previously published books.
Age / Date Finished
THE BIRTH OF TRAGEDY
Age 28 - 1872
" today [1886] for me it is an impossible bookI call it something
poorly written, ponderous, embarrassing, with fantastic and confused
imagery, sentimental  without any impulse for logical cleanliness
[8]
 a book for the initiated, like Music for those dedicated to music
[8]
 an arrogant and rhapsodic book, which right from the start sealed itself
off from the profane rabble of the educated, even more than from
the people, [8]
 "Hellenism and Pessimism" - this would have been a less equivocal
title, seeing that the book contains the first attempt at showing how the
Greeks succeeded in disposing of pessimism-in what manner they overcame
it . Tragedy itself is the proof of the fact that the Greeks were not
pessimists .[3]
 the Greeks will continue to remain, as before, entirely unknown and
unknowable as long as we have no answer to the question, What is
Dionysian?  ." [8]
UNTIMELY MEDITATIONS
Age 29 - 32, 1873 - 1876
" The four essays composing the Untimely Meditations are thoroughly
warlike in tone. They prove that I was no mere dreamer, that I delight in
264
drawing the sword-and perhaps, also, that my wrist is dangerously
supple. The first onslaught (1873) was directed against German culture,
upon which I looked down even at that time with unmitigated contempt.
Without either sense, substance, or goal, it was simply " public opinion."
There could be no more dangerous misunderstanding than to suppose
that Germany's success at arms proved anything in favour of German
culture-and still less the triumph of this culture over that of France.
The second essay (1874) brings to light that which is dangerous, that
which corrodes and poisons life in our manner of pursuing scientific
study : Life is diseased, thanks to this dehumanised piece of clockwork
and mechanism, thanks to the " impersonality" of the workman, and the
false economy of the " division of labour." The object, which is culture, is
lost sight of: modern scientific activity as a means thereto simply produces
barbarism. In this treatise, the " historical sense," of which this century
is so proud, is for the first time recognised as sickness, as a typical
symptom of decay. -
In the third and fourth essays, a sign-post is set up pointing to a higher
concept of culture, to a re-establishment of the notion " culture " ; and
two pictures of the hardest self-love and self-discipline are presented,
two essentially un-modern types, full of the most sovereign contempt for
all that which lay around them and was called " Empire," " Culture," "
Christianity," " Bismarck," and " Success," - these two types were
Schopenhauer and Wagner, or, in a word, Nietzsche ." [3] part 5, sec. 2
HUMAN, ALL TOO HUMAN
Age 34 - 35, 1877 - 1879
" Human, all-too-Human, with its two sequels, is the memorial of a
crisis. It is called a book for free spirits: almost every sentence in it is the
expression of a triumph - by means of it I purged myself of everything in
me which was foreign to my nature. Idealism is foreign to me : the title
of the book means: "Where you see ideal things I see - human, alas ! alltoo-
human things ! "  I know men better. The word " free spirit" in this
book must not be understood as anything else than a spirit that has become
free, that has once more taken possession of itself." [3] part 6, sec. 1
THE DAWN
265
Age 36 - 1880
" With this book I open my campaign against morality . This yessaying
book projects its light, its love, its tenderness, over all evil things,
it restores to them their soul, their clear conscience, and their superior
right and privilege to exist on earth. Morality is not assailed, it simply
ceases to be considered ." [3] part 6, sec. 1
" The question concerning the origin of moral valuations is therefore a
matter of the highest importance to me because it determines the future
of mankind. The demand made upon us to believe that everything is
really in the best hands, that a certain book, the Bible, gives us the definite
and comforting assurance that there is a Providence that wisely rules
the fate of man,-when translated back into reality amounts simply to
this, namely, the will to stifle the truth which maintains the reverse of all
this, which is that until now man has been in the worst possible hands,
and that he has been governed by the physiologically botched, the men
of cunning and burning revengefulness, and the so-called " saints " -
those slanderers of the world and violators of humanity . ." [3] part 7,
sec. 2
THE GAY SCIENCE
Age 37 - 1881
"[This book] seems to be written with the language of the wind that
melts ice and snow: high spirits, unrest, contradiction, and the weather
of April are present in it . Thankfulness comes out of it continuously,
as if something unexpected had just happened - the thankfulness of a
convalescent - for his convalescence was not expected. "Gay Science":
that signifies the celebration of a spirit who has resisted patiently a terrible,
long pressure - patiently, severely, coldly, never submitting, but
also without hope - and now all at once hope has attacked him, the hope
for health, and the intoxication of a convalescent."[9] Preface, sec. 1
" Dawn of Day is a yes-saying book, profound, but clear and kindly.
The same applies once more and in the highest degree to La Gaya
Scienza : in almost every sentence of this book, profundity and playfulness
go gently hand in hand ." [3] part 8, sec. 1
266
THUS SPOKE ZARATHUSTRA
Age 39 - 1882-85
" The fundamental idea of the work, the Eternal Recurrence, the
highest formula of a Yes-saying to life that can ever be attained, was first
conceived in the month of August 1881. I made a note of the idea on a
sheet of paper, with the postscript: "Six thousand feet beyond man and
time."[3] (part 9, sec. 1)
 inspiration?  I will describe it. If one had the smallest vestige of superstition
left in one, it would hardly be possible completely to set aside
the idea that one is the mere incarnation, mouthpiece, or medium of an
almighty power. The idea of revelation, in the sense that something
which profoundly convulses and upsets one becomes suddenly visible
and audible with indescribable certainty and accuracy-describes the
simple fact. One hears-one does not seek; one takes-one does not ask
who gives: a thought suddenly flashes up like lightning, it comes with
necessity, without faltering-I have never had any choice in the matter .
.[3] (part 9, sec. 3)
 The psychological problem presented by the type of Zarathustra is,
how can he, who in an unprecedented manner says no, and acts no, in
regard to all that which has been affirmed until now, remain nevertheless
a yes-saying spirit ? how can he who bears the heaviest destiny on
his shoulders and whose very life-task is a fatality, yet be the brightest
and the most transcendental of spirits-for Zarathustra is a dancer? how
can he who has the hardest and most terrible grasp of reality, and who
has thought the most " abysmal thoughts," nevertheless avoid conceiving
these things as objections to existence, or even as objections to the eternal
recurrence of existence ?- how is it that on the contrary he finds reasons
for being himself the eternal affirmation of all things, "the tremendous
and unlimited saying of Yes and Amen"? " [3] (part 9, sec. 6)
BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL
Age 42 - 1886
" In all its essential points, this book (1886) is a criticism of modernity,
embracing the modern sciences, arts, even politics, together with certain
indications as to a type which would be the reverse of modern man, or as
little like him as possible, a noble and yes-saying type. In this last respect
267
the book is a school for gentlemen-the term gentleman being understood
here in a much more spiritual and radical sense than it has implied until
now ." [3] (part 10, sec. 2)
ON THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS
Age 43 - 1887
" The truth of the first essay is the psychology of Christianity: the birth
of Christianity out of the spirit of ressentiment [resentment], not, as is
supposed, out of the "spirit," - a counter-movement by its very nature,
the great rebellion against the dominion of noble values .[3] (part 11,
sec. 1)
 The second essay deals with the psychology of conscience: this is not,
as is supposed, "the voice of God in man," - it is the instinct of cruelty,
turning back after it can no longer discharge itself outwardly. For the
first time, cruelty is here revealed as one of the oldest and basic groundwork
of culture that simply cannot be imagined away [3] (part 11, sec.
1)
 The third essay answers the question from where the ascetic ideal
comes, the ideal of the priests, derives its great power although it is the
very harmful ideal in extreme, a will to the end, an ideal of decadence
." [3] (part 11, sec. 1)
TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS
Age 44 - 1888 (Published January 24, 1889)
"This work  is altogether an exception among books : there is no work
more rich in substance, more independent, more upsetting-more wicked.
If anyone should desire to obtain a rapid sketch of how everything, before
my time, was standing on its head, he should begin reading me in
this book. That which is called " Idols " on the title page is simply the old
truth that has been believed in until now. In plain English, The Twilight
of the Idols means that the old truth is on its last legs ." [3] (part 12,
sec. 1)
ECCE HOMO
268
(This short book is his autobiography and commentary on his writings)
Age 44 - 1888 (Published April 1908)
" Since I must soon confront humanity with the greatest demand ever
made of it, it seems necessary to say who and what I am. Truly, this
ought to be well known already, for I have not " held my tongue" about
myself. But the difference between the greatness of my task and the
smallness of my contemporaries, is revealed by the fact that people have
neither heard me nor yet seen me. I live on my own self-made credit
 Under these circumstances, it is my duty - against which my usual reserve
and, even more, the pride of my instincts rebel - to say : Listen ! for
I am such and such a person. Above all, do not mistake me for someone
else!  [3] (preface, sec. 1)
 I am, for example, in no way a bogey man, or moral monster. In truth,
I am the very opposite of the kind of man that has been honoured until
now as virtuous. Between ourselves, it seems to me that exactly this is
part of my pride. I am a disciple of the philosopher Dionysus, and I
would even prefer to be a satyr than a saint. But just read this little book !
Maybe I have been successful, perhaps this work had no other meaning
than to give expression to this contrast in a cheerful and philanthropic
manner "[3] (preface, sec. 2)
THE ANTICHRIST
Age 44 - 1888 (Published November 1894)
"This book belongs to the most rare of men. Perhaps not one of them is
yet alive . First the day after tomorrow must come for me. Some men
are born posthumously.
The conditions under which anyone understands me, and necessarily
understands meI know them only too well. Even to endure my seriousness,
my passion, he must carry intellectual integrity to the verge of
hardness. He must be accustomed to living on mountain topsand to
looking upon the wretched gabble of politics and nationalism as beneath
him. He must have become indifferent; he must never ask of the truth
whether it brings profit to him or a fatality to him He must have an inclination,
born of strength, for questions that no one has the courage for;
269
the courage for the forbidden; predestination for the labyrinth. The experience
of seven solitudes. New ears for new music. New eyes for what
is most distant. A new conscience for truths that have until now remained
unheard. And the will to economize in the grand mannerto
hold together his strength, his enthusiasm Reverence for self; love of
self; absolute freedom of self ..
Very well, then! of that sort only are my readers, my true readers, my
readers foreordained: of what account are the rest?  " [10] Preface to
the Anti-Christ
REFERENCES
1. Twilight of the Idols, Part 2, Section 26
2. Basic Writings of Nietzsche, p. 657
3. Ecce Homo
4. Nietzsche: A Critical Life, by Ronald Hayman
5. Nietzsche Chronicle Timeline by Malcom Brown at
http://www.dartmouth.edu/~fnchron/index.html
6. Conversations with Nietzsche, Sandler L. Gilman, Translated by David
J. Parent, 1987
7. The Cambridge Companion to Nietzsche, by Bernd Magnus, Kathleen
M Higgins
8. The Birth of Tragedy, 1886 Preface
9. The Gay Science, 1886 Preface
10. The Antichrist, Preface
270
C - Eternal Recurrence, by Bill Chapko
APPENDIX C
ETERNAL RECURRENCE:
THE WORLD LOVES YOU SO MUCH IT REPEATS YOU
FOREVER
by Bill Chapko
This essay presents a new view of eternal recurrence, expanding on
Nietzsche's fundamental idea. It focuses on personal existential recurrence.
It is a call to wake up from the social dream.
CONTENTS
What is Eternal Recurrence?
Waking Up from the Social Dream
How Long Until We Return ?
The Cheerful Magic of Death
Is it You that Returns or another Person Exactly Like You ?
Do I have a Choice, a Chance, to Make Each Return a Little Different? A
Little Better?
If We Are Exactly the Same Each Time, What About Free Will ?
Can I Remember Previous Recurrences?
Waking up - Making the World Appear.
Eternal Recurrence and the Will to Laughter
Is There a Proof of Eternal Recurrence?
Does Eternal Recurrence Imply a New Morality?
Is Eternal Recurrence the "Greatest Weight"?
The Iron Law of Yin-Yang
Will the Thought of Eternal Recurrence Bring You or Humanity to a
Higher Level?
No Ideals? Does This Mean We Value Nothing?
Equal Happiness-Suffering for All? Couldn't This Be Used by Oppressors
to Justify Oppression?
What is the Compensating Yin-Yang Partner of the Misery of Dying?
Loved Ones
271
Waking Up to Your Children
Eternal Recurrence Gives You Courage.
Becoming a Spiritual Adventurer
What is Eternal Recurrence? (Also Called "Eternal Return")
"This life, as you now live it, and have lived it, you must live it once
more, and also innumerable times; and there will be nothing new in it,
but every pain and every joy and every thought and every sigh, and
everything unspeakably small and great in your life must come to you
again, and all in the same series and sequence - even this spider and this
moonlight among the trees, and even this moment, and I myself. The
eternal hourglass of existence will ever be turned over and over again,
and you with it  "
From Nietzsche's book, 'The Gay Science', Section 341
Waking Up from the Social Dream
About 40,000 years ago, during what is called the human 'Upper Paleolithic
Revolution', our predictive capacities developed to the point
where we saw our inevitable death. A tiger jumping at us out of the
bushes was not necessary to scare the hell out of us. Our minds did it,
and we mobilized to act. The result - 40 millennia of social fantasies.
Tribal religions, spirits, afterworlds, legends, taboos, good and evils, social
mores of conduct, superstitions  many of them delightful and
moving but mostly lots of nervous low-level entertainment, social worries
and bickering, see-saws of belief and doubt, all marinated in continuous
mind chatter. In the last two millennia we have become more organized,
more global, more cluttered in our social fantasies: nations,
bibles, "history", "knowledge", astrology, universities, literature, science,
religions and ideologies. It's time to realize the silliness of these fake
worlds which are bigger than us, which give meaning to our small
lives, where we in some way continue after death. We don't live on in
heaven or hell or in God's lap or in a new body. We don't live on in our
reputation or in our small contribution to science or scholarship or
knowledge. We don't live on in the memories of those who knew us or
in an invention or idea named after us or a book we wrote. We don't live
272
on in our good works or being a good citizen or "making the world a
little better" or living a morally good life.
We are not different from animals, only they're more awake while we
spend most of our time head-dancing in our big frontal lobes.
The thought of eternal recurrence is a means for us to wake up.
How Long Until We Return ?
A very, very, very long time.
How many years? We need a big number. A billion is 1000000000, a 1
with 9 zeros after it. A googol is a number with 100 zeros after the 1. A
googolplex is a number with a googol amount of zeros after the 1. Too
small. The mathematicians invented the "Graham number" which the
Guinness World Records listed as the "World Champion largest number".
It is too large to be written in scientific notation because even the digits
in the exponent would exceed the number of atoms in the observable
universe. Well, even this is much, much, much too small a number of
years. We're not talking about shuffling a deck of cards or the sand
pebbles of a beach. We're talking about shuffling the position and motion
of every atom in the universe. However, eventually there is an incredibly
large finite number of years when "the music box repeats it's tune".
This is a long time to wait. To handle the wait the universe gives us
the "cheerful magic of death".
The Cheerful Magic of Death
To confront the multiple Graham number of years for the return, the
cheerful magic of death provides that
there is no waiting
The moment after you die you "wake up" as the baby you were.
But when the music box plays the tune again - Is it still you?
273
Is it You that Returns or another Person Exactly Like You ?
It is you.
Luckily, you are not separated from the universe. You are not a "ghost
in a machine". The ghost would die forever and the machine would
come back. You not only have a deep connection, at every instant, with
your body, the earth and it's universe. Every instant you are your body,
this earth, it's universe and nothing else.
When the exact same universe returns, you're there.
Do I have a Choice, a Chance, to Make Each Return a Little Different ?
A Little Better ?
No choice, no chance, no different, no better  (and no worse).
Each time you return it's exactly the same you. If there were the slightest
infinitesimal difference, the butterfly effect would not only radically
change your entire life and the future course of human history but radically
change the whole future of the universe such that at the incredibly
large number of years after which you are supposed to return, you
wouldn't be there since the universe would be radically different.
That's how well connected you are to the universe.
If We Are Exactly the Same Each Time, What About Free Will ?
Nietzsche attacked the idea of free will repeatedly and mercilessly:
'free will'  the foulest of all theologians' artifices  has been invented
essentially for the purpose of punishment, that is, because one wanted to
impute guilt . we immoralists are trying with all our strength to take
the concept of guilt and the concept of punishment out of the world
again." "The Twilight of the Idols" Part 5 Section 7, 'The Error of Free
Will'
274
If we deny the religious moralist his sado-masochistic pleasure tool, is
there any other use for this idea? Probably not.
University philosophers have long played entertaining mind games
trying to prove free will true or false, but it was not much more than
entertainment.
Any "what-if" statement applied to the past is absolutely silly. The
butterfly-effect is not an observation but a mathematical aspect of complex
systems, and "complex systems" encompasses everything in the universe
outside of billiard tables and chemistry-lab test-tubes. It says that
any one little "what if this were different" radically changes whatever follows.
If I had not gotten that parking ticket in 1972, all four of my children
would never have existed.
Seeing everything in your past as fate is wise. It's very close to having
no regrets and no resentments.
Seeing your evolving present actions as fate is also wise. Experience,
emotion and intelligence flow more smoothly, genuinely and gracefully.
You're not plagued by sputtering "decisions". It's much easier to ride
your spirit.
Seeing your future as fate is hardest and wisest of all. Decidophobia
(fear of decisions), feeling that choosing one person or path over another
will be letting the experience of that other person or path die forever,
seeing and being paralyzed by this abyss-fantasy, is a comic situation.
What makes you think you have such god-like powers to see and save a
world"? Life is awareness, experience and feelings, all with a spirit and
flow of their own, obeying the iron laws of yin and yang, up and down.
You can never know what that person or path would have been for you
and certainly it would not have been all "wonderfulness".
Can I Remember Previous Recurrences?
No. That's silly.
Rare, random, playful, uncontrollable psychic glimpses of the future
or deja vu feelings might be possible, but they would come from the
275
world you are living in now, not some cosmic memory that spans a multiple
graham number of years.
Thank goodness we don't remember, for it would rob life of its freshness,
excitement and surprise.
Waking up - Making the World Appear.
Animals dream and probably day-dream but most of the time, assuming
they haven't been made neurotic by contact with humans, they are
awake, the world appears before them and becomes the center stage of
their lives. Humans live in an opposite manner. The center stage is their
social fantasies while they flitting-ly and mechanically check in and act
upon the world around them. Ancient Eastern wisdom is full of hopes
and techniques for quieting the mind, for enlightenment, satori and
awakening. But we are all still mesmerized and fooled by man's 40,000
year old project of avoiding personal death through projecting our
selves into social dreams, moralities, hopes, projects, plans, legends,
good and evils.
In believing in personal eternal recurrence, that our life is completely
solid, repeating itself forever, the self becomes unimportant. This
self is always what you imagine what others imagine what you are.
All this social imagining becomes silly to you. You're left with the world
that appears before you.
Eternal Recurrence and the Will to Laughter
Awareness is the world's mystical experience.
Nietzsche thought that the basic "stuff" of the world was not atoms or
love or survival or God but the "will to power". I accept power as the
best candidate, but I propose a complimentary yin-yang partner. I call it
the will to laughter" (or just "laughter" if "power" is its partner) and it is
intimately involved with Eternal Recurrence. It is the world's delight and
happiness in its own useless dance, the eternal laughable folly of power,
the lightness of awareness, the freedom of not wanting or having to
make the world better.
We humans waste life on a neurotic, futile, social fantasy flight from
our personal death. We have lost the majestic awareness that animals
have for their world. What we consider most powerful, our
"consciousness" or mind, this chatterbox mish-mosh of awareness,
thought, head-dancing and fantasy-world, is a clown, forever laughable.
276
We haven't even come close to seeing or accepting the first basic truth
of our modern situation, that technology is life's way of making a species
weaker. Every time we get in a car instead of walking or running or dancing
every time we cover symptoms with drugs or play it safe with
shotgun antibiotic consumption every time we apply university categories
or theories to our local situation instead of waking up to look at
it every time we substitute the fake drama of movies and TV for the
drama and play of those close to us  every day we live in those artificial,
sterile, controllable, laboratory-like boxes called houses, offices and
stores -  our bodies get a little weaker, a little stupider. Human pretensions
of power are an amazingly huge source of laughter. After many
generations of this behaviour the human body will become extremely
weak and fragile. We will have squandered the 2 billion year strength
that our bodies have accumulated without technology. It may be time for
life to invent something new.
The greatest power in the universe, truly infinite, is the 'butterfly effect'.
Whether you wave your hand towards the right or the left will
totally change the faces of every person on earth 500 years from now and
into eternity. Here infinite power meets infinite laughter - for this power
is infinitely useless.
Is There a Proof of Eternal Recurrence?
Not empirically. There is no outside observer to take and compare
notes during the double multiple Graham-years wait until two returns
had passed. God, who might volunteer for the job, is too busy trying to
prove that he exists.
Nietzsche made a couple of logical attempts at proofs in his notes, but
he was never so convinced of them as to publish them.
My "proof" is "experiential". It comes from the sense and feeling of the
non-neurotic solidity of existence, of awareness. It is indicated in the following
paradox:
If death is real, why are we so calm?  . . If death is not real, why are
we so nervous?
There is a yin-yang dynamic going on here. The abyss, the personal extinction
that would last forever, if it were true, would be too devastating
and paralysing psychologically. Yes, death is very real. In a near car accident
the adrenaline rush of our body tells us it's very real. But the extinction
that our predictive minds first saw 40,000 years ago, is not eternal.
Yes, a very, very, very big number of years, but not eternal. The world as
277
it is now returns. Everything we are aware of, every wandering moment
of awareness is not fleeting but eternal, repeating itself eternally and us
with it. The world loves you so much it repeats you forever.
In the end a rock solid proof of eternal recurrence is elusive, but this is
the case for all "knowledge", theories and philosophies. The only solid
rock certainty, put forward by Descartes, "I think, therefore I am" is almost
true but not quite. Thinking is the most ghostly of activities and is
always neurotically trying to make itself fixed and lasting, always chasing
the belief, "this thought will survive my death". Despite its wandering
nature, awareness is the most solid of rocks. "I am aware of the sky, I
am aware of that tree, I am aware of thinking, therefore I exist." You may
be wrong about the words sky, tree or thinking but you are sure about
being aware of something, about being aware. "I am aware, therefore I
exist". Awareness and existence are the same.
What might be more important to ask than a "proof" of the theory of
eternal recurrence is  what is the value of this theory? Is it a gateway to
a "new health"? . . My answer: It's the only "projection-mind-game"
with the possibility of waking up, of happily and playfully dissolving itself
to allow the possibility of localizing yourself in your immediate
world, to allow what Fritz Perls so elegantly expressed as "losing your
mind, and coming to your senses".
Does Eternal Recurrence Imply a New Morality?
Not as I see it.
You could say eternal recurrence implies a new "natural morality"
which is close to "animal morality". "Animal morality" ?! The incongruity
of "animal" and "morality" seen together reveals the scam. The incongruity
says, "animals die but we don't". It's better to just dump the word.
Without morality, are we free to do anything we want ? No, there are
always consequences. You can't walk through walls. You can't step on
toes of others without them getting mad. You can't threaten someone
without him defending himself in one way or another. But this isn't morality,
it's intelligence.
What eternal recurrence does imply is a new "health", which follows
from an awakening from the social dream to the world around us. This
world around us of course includes our body, which contains all the "dos
and don'ts" that animals have, a passion to defend itself and its family, a
great wisdom and intelligence, a "will to power" and a "will to laughter".
278
At its center, morality implies cheating life of its death. The moral
head dance can provide great low-level entertainment but it will forever
miss the sparkling, crystalline, raw vitality of existence.
Is Eternal Recurrence the "Greatest Weight"?
It doesn't seem heavy to me.
Section 341 of the Gay Science is called "The Greatest Weight" and it
contains Nietzsche's best description of eternal recurrence. The first half
of this section is above, at the beginning of this essay. The second half
goes on as follows:
"Would you not throw yourself down and gnash your teeth, and curse
the demon who so spoke? Or have you once experienced a tremendous
moment in which you would answer him: "You are a god, and never did
I hear anything so divine." If that thought acquired power over you as
you are, it would transform you, and perhaps crush you; the question
with regard to each and every thing: "Do you want this once more, and
also for innumerable times?" would lie as the greatest weight upon your
actions. Or, how well disposed would you have to become to yourself
and to life, so as to long for nothing more fervently than this ultimate
eternal confirmation and seal?"
This "greatest weight" that Nietzsche mentions as one possible reaction
does not refer directly to eternal recurrence itself but to paralyzing
"decisions". This is the weight of morality intruding itself again. Let's
have, let's repeat the "good stuff", only joy or happiness or clever
thoughts or "good works" rather than having, repeating fear or suffering
or stupid thoughts or "evil" deeds. But making our life truly "better" (not
just looking better) is eternally problematic and not so simple. The universe
is playing a joke on us.
Let's take joy as an example. True deep thunderous joy, not the posed
joy seen on faces in advertising or "positive thinking", is always preceded
by its yin-yang partner, by a period, long or short, of fear. The patient receiving
a lab report ruling out cancer, the successful flight from a war
zone, victory in battle, getting a good mark on a final exam in college, the
landing of a good job  all these joys are preceded by fear of one sort or
another - the more fear, the deeper the joy. Smaller joys are surrounded
by smaller fears. So trying to fill your life with joy (and the other good
things) is a stage for comedy. Life is both giving us it's greatest
279
imperatives (the essence of pain is to run away from it) and joking with
us  but we don't get the joke.
No, the paralyzing weight of decision is the moral game revisited:
"will this save me from death?". Forget it. Ride your spirit instead.
The Iron Law of Yin-Yang
There is no isolated happiness or suffering, only a happiness-suffering
flow back and forth. Happiness is the release from suffering. Suffering is
the loss of happiness. There would be no happiness without suffering.
There would be no suffering without happiness. The flow is uncontrollable
and uncanny. This same yin-yang applies to every human and nonhuman
aspect of the universe: good-evil, joy-fear, peace-struggle,
knowledge-ignorance, wave-particle, subject-object, energy-matter,
power-laughter, light-darkness, ad infinitum. Yin-yang makes the world
dance.
Human progress has been and will always be  perfectly zero. The
more knowledge universities accumulate, the more possibilities there are
for ignorance, for being mesmerised by their structured categories, ideas
and theories instead of looking at a situation as an intelligent organism.
The more comfort and security is made by a generation with memories
of hard or dangerous times, the more their children will be rebellious
and look for thrills. The more toys technology spits out the more nervous
boredom we have. The more entertaining our living in videoland is, the
more our bodies know it's flat, lifeless and unreal. America's historical
mission is to prove that you can't make the world better.
We need not pity or envy any being in the universe, past or future. The
newly hatched turtle with the strength of his body and instincts racing
happily across the sand towards the sea only to be killed and eaten by a
seagull is no less fortunate than the life of a Nobel prize winner whose
hard work to get it drove his wife crazy and made her divorce him. Both
lives have their share of happiness and suffering and repeat themselves
continuously for eternity. I'm not sure which life is more boring.
"No progress? Effort will not make the world better or happier or more
just? We might as well do nothing." Go ahead, do nothing  until
you get bored and your body tells you to do something exciting and forget
about the idea of yin-yang. Doing only nothing is just another impossible
attempt to get out of the flow of yin-yang. The universe is
laughing.
280
Will the Thought of Eternal Recurrence Bring You or Humanity to a
Higher Level?
No. With Nietzsche (Ecce Homo, Preface, Section 2), I don't believe in
"ideals" which bring us to any "higher level". Effort towards an ideal is a
comic activity. There is no hierarchy of levels of happiness-suffering,
only near-infinite colors of happiness-suffering. Your spirit, which
changes you effortlessly, will determine if and how the thought of eternal
recurrence will affect you.
There are higher types of human beings, the non-neurotic types, but
they appear by uncontrollable fate, not choice and effort. In fact, ideal,
choice and effort together are the symptoms of neurosis.
Nietzsche's hints at eugenics were a major blunder. Humans are just
too stupid to use eugenics to create a higher species. Following their
"ideals", they would probably sterilize everyone with an SAT math score
lower than 700, not realizing that concept manipulation is one of the
most useless forms of intelligence. They would slice out the "gene for aggression"
so we would be all peaceful and cooperative and orderly and
dull. "Making the world better" is full of laughs.
No Ideals? Does This Mean We Value Nothing?
We constantly bring value into the world, every moment, by every act
or non-act we make. Life is a dance of giving value. Placing value is the
joy of life, is life itself. But this happens only on a local, immediate level,
in awareness-space, never on fantasies called eternal "values", "ideas"
and "ideals". When someone speaks up at a political or religious meeting,
it is to stimulate or hearten those real people at that meeting. Most of the
time he does it with fantasies of one kind or another, but it's the excitement
in those bodies which produces his own excitement. The fact that
the magic of ideals come and go, that we argue over them, that different
cultures and sub-cultures have opposite ideals, shows they are not
"eternal" and never will be. There is forever a dance between belief and
non-belief and there's no way of not dancing. The eternal "will to
laughter" is shinning through.
281
Equal Happiness-Suffering for All? Couldn't This Be Used by Oppressors
to Justify Oppression?
Yes. But they'd have to hide the philosophy from the oppressed.
"Riding your spirit" could include a powerful, sustained dose of
rebellion.
What is the Compensating Yin-Yang Partner of the Misery of Dying?
The completion of dying is immediately followed by that magnificent
surge of life, joy and power which is the embryo-baby-child.
Loved Ones
All my life I have loved periods and moments of sadness. It seemed to
me to be a noble emotion, both hurtful and sweet. However, I'm not
quite sure where it fits in the belief of eternal personal recurrence because
 you never really say "goodbye" to your loved ones, you say,
"see you in 30 years" or just "see you soon".
Perhaps animals are right. They never cry. Their periods of mourning
seem very short or not there at all.
Waking Up to Your Children
Morals are silly and poisonous. You will not "save" your children in
any way. Your "responsibilities" to them are physical protection (food
and basic shelter), making their childhood childlike (90% of which is
leaving them alone) and enjoying their company as much as your spirit
can (since you will be spending eternity with them). Until the rest of
your neighbors and fellow citizens give up their religious and/or selfrealization
moral crusades (which may be never) you'll also have to
gently protect them from your neighbors.
Social and moral pretensions dissolve and you are left watching these
wonder-ous, miraculous beings. If there is an ounce of play left in your
spirit you can interact with these play-teachers and you're in the best
heaven that life can give.
Eternal Recurrence Gives You Courage.
282
The life you live continues uninterrupted for eternity, repeating itself.
Knowing this, a long life does not seem so important as it used to be.
Your body naturally strives for a full and fruitful life. However the higher
spirit of your body knows that whether you live 40 or 80 or 20 or even
5 years, it is not too important. You can take risks.
Becoming a Spiritual Adventurer
Awareness is the world's mystical experience. Give the world a thrill.
Become a spiritual adventurer.
All the wasted energy of trying to make believe you continue after
death evaporates. The world appears. Adventures can begin. Of course
your world contains numerous people who will not like anyone exposing,
mocking or even ignoring their social fantasies. You still play the social
games - only they're not important anymore. Those close to you,
family and friends, probably won't understand. It doesn't matter. They
are more real and more lovely to look at than ever. You respond as you
always have, but without the fear, without the edge. Laughter is always
very close  but unseen.
Urges to preach "The New Awareness" to yourself or others give you a
hearty laugh. It is as self-contradictory as a Zen koan.
Nietzsche's "love of fate", "that one wants nothing to be different, not
forward, not backward, not in all eternity" becomes more real to you.
There's no one to save, no one to bring to self-realization, no one even
to awaken. Either you're destined to have the thought of eternal recurrence
hit you or you're not.
What kind of adventures will you have? No one can tell you. It's in
your spirit and only you can ride your spirit.
Bill Chapko
Naples, Italy
2010
Version 3.37
Email: billchapko@gmail.com
Author Profile
THE END
283
Return to First Page
284
From the same author on Feedbooks
Nietzsche's Best 8 Books (2010)
"Nietzsche's Best 8 Books" contains the complete and unabridged texts
of:
1.The Gay Science
2.Ecce Homo
3.Thus Spoke Zarathustra
4.The Dawn
5.Twilight of the Idols
6.The Antichrist
7.Beyond Good and Evil
8.On the Genealogy of Morals
Features:
Extensive Hyperlink Navigation
An Introduction to Nietzsche's Life and Writings
Timeline Biography
Nietzsche's Comments on Each of his Books
Unique among philosophers Nietzsche wrote mostly aphorisms. Within
a book aphorisms hop around from subject to subject. A particular
subject can reappear in many of his books. With this ebook the reader
can search 8 books at once to explore a theme or subject.
From the Introduction by the Editor:
"University philosophers, especially from America and England, have always
been bewildered and irritated by Nietzsche. He doesn't fit anywhere.
His influence has been outside university culture - among artists,
dancers, poets, writers, novelists, psychologists, playwrights. Some of
the most famous who publicly acknowledged being strongly influenced
by Nietzsche were Picasso, Isadora Duncan, Martha Graham, William
Butler Yeats, Rainer Rilke, Allen Ginsberg, Khalil Gibran, Martin Buber,
H.L. Mencken, Emma Goldman, Jacques Derrida, Michel Foucault, Thomas
Mann, Hermann Hesse, Jack London, Franz Kafka, Jean-Paul Sartre,
Albert Camus, Sigmund Freud, Carl Jung, Karl Jaspers, Alfred Adler,
Fritz Perls, Eugene O'Neill and George Bernard Shaw. . . . Explore Nietzsche
yourself. He mostly wrote directly and clearly, without scholarly
jargon. See if he brings out the artist or psychologist or dancer in you."
285
www.feedbooks.com
Food for the mind
286
